This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 


at|http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/ 


■^%4 


W\ 


M 


Ills 


^''^^vt  mmt 


S  Scfjooi 


WBi.^^/'^'^^OO^CAX. 


<=AAfBRlDG£ 


MDCCCCX 


Vld 


^ 


^ 


^ 


%    •» 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^  THE 

J 

Syriac  New  Testament 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 

FROM 

THE  PESHITTO  VERSION 

By  JAMES   MURDOCK,  S.T.D. 

Late  Professor  of  Lbarnbd  Languages  in  the  University  of  Vermont,  Professor  op 
Sacred  Rhetoric  and  Ecclesiastical  History  in  Andover  Theological  Seminary 
Member  of  the  American  Oriental    Society,   Vice-President  op  the 
Philosophical  Society  of  Connecticut,  President  op  the  Connec- 
ticut Academy  of  Arts  and  Sciences,  Translator  of 
Moshbim*s  Ecclesiastical  History,  etc.,  etc. 

WITH  A  HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION  AND  A  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH 
OF  THE  TRANSLATOR 

By  HORACE    L.    HASTINGS 

editor  of  the  christian,  boston,  mass. 

9nti  a  iSiiiliostapfjtcal  ^ppentitx 
By  ISAAC  H.  HALL,  Ph.D.,  Litt.D. 

LATE  CURATOR  OF  THE  METROPOUTAN  ART  MUSEUM,  NEW  YORK 


NINTH   EDITION 


BOSTON : 

H.   L.   HASTINGS   &   SONS 

1915 

•  Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


Andover-Harvard 
Theological  Library 
CxMBRiDGii.  Mass. 


Copyright,   1893 

Copyright,  1896 

Entered  at  Stationers'  Hall 

H.  L.  HASTINGS 

Boston,  Mass..  U.  S.  A. 


Norwood  Press 
Berwick  &  Smith  Co.  Syriac  New  Test—9M-5,  '15 

Norwood,  Mass.,  U.  S.  A-  Printed  in  America 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE 


NEW  TESTAMENT; 


OR, 


THE   BOOK   OP    TIE   HOLT    GOSPEL 

OF  OUR  LORD  AND  OUR  GOD, 

JESUS    THE    MESSIAH. 


A    LITERAL    TRANSLATION    FROM    THE 

Striao  Peshitto  VERSIOlSr, 

BY  JAMES  MURDOCK,  D.  D. 


SCRIPTURAL    TRACT    REPOSITORY: 

JOHN  K.  HA8TING8,  I  MARSHALL  BROS.,  AoBirre, 

Boston,  Masbaghubbtts,  U.  S.  A.       I      London,  5a  Patbbnobtbr  Row,  E.G. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HISTORICAL    INTRODUCTION 


BY  H.  L.  HASTINGS. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HISTORICAL  INTRODUCTION 

TO  THE 

PESHITTO  SYRIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


BY  H.  L.  HASTINGS. 


In  offering  to  the  Christian  public  the  New  Testament  translated 
from  the  ancient  Syriac  Version,  it  is  eminently  proper  that  some 
statement  should  be  made  exhibiting  the  grounds  on  which  this  book 
claims  the  attention  of  Christian  students.  To  his  son  Timothy,  the 
great  apostle  said,  "  The  things  that  thou  hast  heard  of  me,  among 
many  witnesses,  the  same  commit  to  faithful  men,  who  shall  be  able 
to  teach  others  also."  The  records  of  those  sublime  truths  and  won- 
drous facts  which  are  the  foundation  of  Christian  faith  and  hope,  are 
charged  with  such  tremendous  import  that  they  challenge  the  most 
searching  investigation  and  the  most  careful  scrutiny.  The  apostolic 
writings  were  therefore  from  the  first  most  carefully  preserved. 
They  were  authenticated  by  the  autographs  of  their  authors ;  they 
were  transmitted  by  faithful  messengers  to  the  churches  to  whom 
they  were  addressed ;  they  were  publicly  read  in  the  assemblies  of 
Christians ;  they  were  carefully  copied,  jealously  guarded,  preserved 
even  at  the  peril  of  life  itself,  and  so  handed  down  i rom  generation 
to  generation,  as  the  only  light  that  could  dispel  the  darkness  of 
those  ages,  and  guide  the  feet  of  wandering  humanity  in  paths  of 
peace  and  truth. 

From  the  earliest  times  the  church  has  thus  depended  for  guid- 
ance upon  written  documents  divinely  given.  Our  Saviour's  con- 
stant appeal  was,  "  Thus  it  is  written ;"  and  lie  rebuked  the  unwis- 
dom of  those  who  were  "  slow  of  heart  to  believe  "  the  prophetic 
word.  The  holy  wntings  were  studied  from  childhood,  and  the 
apostle  informs  us  that  they  were  able  to  make  one  "  wise  unto  sal- 
vation ;"  and  that  through  them  the  man  of  God  might  be  "  perfect, 

(vii) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Vlll  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SYRIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

throughly  furnished  unto  all  good  works."  In  parting  from  his 
Ephesian  brethren,  after  warning  them  against  grievous  wolves,  and 
against  the  misguiding  of  perverse  men,  he  says,  "  And  now,  breth- 
ren, I  commend  you  to  God  and  to  the  word  of  His  grace,  which  is 
able  to  build  you  up,  and  give  to  you  an  inheritance  among  all  them 
which  are  sanctified." 

The  truths  which  were  thus  handed  down  to  the  church  were  on 
record.  Oral  tradition  was  too  uncertain  to  be  trusted,  for  the  mem- 
ory often  fails  to  retain  the  treasures  committed  to  its  care ;  but 
that  which  is  written,  and  widely  diffused,  is  secure. 

The  church  of  Christ  has  long  been  familiar  with  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures in  Hebrew  and  in  Greek.  The  Latin  *  vulgate,'  or  common  ver- 
sion, made  at  an  early  date  for  the  use  of  the  people  who  did  not  un- 
derstand the  original  tongues,  is  well  known  both  in  the  original  and 
by  an  English  translation ;  but  for  many  centuries  the  Syriac  veraion 
was  almost  unknown  to  European  scholars.  Yet  though  unknown  it 
was  well  known ;  it  existed,  was  read,  studied,  expounded,  quoted, 
loved,  and  cherished  ;  and  as  it  is  now  brought  more  prominently  to 
public  notice,  it  seems  proper  to  make  mention  of  the  story  of  its 
preservation,  the  channels  through  which  it  has  come,  and  the  prov- 
idential circumstances  by  which  it  has  been  brought  into  notice. 

I.  THE  MARONITES  OF  LEBANON. 

Upon  the  terraces  of  Lebanon,  from  Tripoli  on  the  north  to  Tyre 
and  the  Lake  of  Gennesaret  on  the  south,  especially  in  the  districts 
near  Beyrout  and  Tripoli,  there  dwells  a  peculiar  half-independent 
sect  or  community  known  as  the  Maronites,  numbering  perhaps  be- 
tween  two  and  three  hundred  thousand.  Members  of  this  fraterni- 
ty are  also  scattered  throughout  Syria,  and  they  have  congregations 
of  worshipers  in  Damascus,  Aleppo,  and  elsewhere. 

Though  the  Maronites  have  for  centuries  spoken  Arabic,  the  lan- 
guage of  their  conquerors  and  oppressors,  yet  they  are  themselves  of 
Syrian  descent,  and  the  liturgy  employed  in  their  worship  is  in  the 
Syriac  tongue ;  though  it  is  to  many  of  them  a  dead  language.  Gov- 
erned by  their  ecclesiastics  and  sheikhs^  they  maintain  a  measure  of 
independence,  paying  an  uncertain  tribute  to  the  Ottoman  Sultan. 
Their  name  is  said  to  be  derived  from  the  Monasterv  of  St.  Martin, 
on  theOjignteSj  their  first  Patriarch  having  been  Yohannes  MarUn. 
"Persecuted  by  the  Emperors  of  Constantinople,  they  retired  to  the 
fastnesses  of  Lebanon,  where  they  bade  defiance  to  their  foes,  an<J 
have  continued  to  this  day,  a  brave,  industrious  and  devout  people. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION   TO   THB    SYRIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT.  IX 

In  1182,  through  the  influence  of  the  Crusaders,  they  entered  into 
certain  relations  with  the  Church  of  Rome, — not  without  considera- 
ble opposition  and  consequent  trouble, — ^but  in  1596  a  national  Council 
was  held  which  resulted  in  a  qualified  submission  to  the  Roman 
See,  and  a  substantial  agreement  with  respect  to  doctrines ;  though 
the  Maronites  retained  the  celebration  of  the  Lord's  Supper  in  both 
kinds,  the  Syriac  Liturgy,  the  marriage  of  the  priests,  their  own 
Fast  Days,  and  other  peculiarities. 

During  the  session  of  the  Fifth  Lateran  Council,  a»  d.  1613-1515, 
three  Maronite  ecclesiastics  were  sent  to  the  Council  to  represent 
their  Patriarch.  One  of  them,  named  Acurius  Josephus,  desired  per- 
mission to  celebrate  the  Eucharist  in  a  Roman  church  in  the  Syriac 
tongue,  according  to  the  Syrian  Liturgy.  To  one  Teseo  Ambrogio, 
—or  Theseus  Ambrose, — a  pious  and  gifted  Canon  of  the  Lateran 
Church,  bom  at  Paviain  1469,  who  had  formerly  been  a  lawyer,  and 
who  knew  something  of  the  Semitic  languages.  Cardinal  Santa  Croce 
assigned  the  work  of  instructing  the  Syrian  priest  in  the  Latin 
tongue,  and  examining  into  the  orthodoxy  of  his  Liturgy. 

It  was  a  difficult  task.  Teseo  knew  little  of  Syriac,  and  the  Syrian 
knew  nothing  of  Latin.  But,  a  learned  Jew,  being  called  to  their 
aid,  one  of  the  Syrians  named  Elias,  a  sub-deacon,  translated  the 
Syriac  into  Arabic  for  the  Jew,  and  the  Jew  translated  the  Arabic 
into  Latin  to  Teseo,  and  thus  knowledge  of  the  ancient  Syriac 
tongue  came  from  the  East  to  the  West. 

Teseo  and  the  Syrians  became  s^reat  friends.  They  taught  him 
Syriac,  in  which  he  made  such  rapid  progress,  that  when  Leo  X.  was 
dead,  and  Teseo  left  Rome  in  1 521  for  his  native  Pavia,  he  had 
already  provided  copper  matrices,  cast  types,  engaged  a  printer,  and 
was  ready  to  publish  the  Psalms  in  Syriac.  But  in  1527,  when  he 
was  at  Ravenna  attending  a  chapter  of  his  Order,  Pavia  was  stormed 
and  sacked  by  the  army  of  Francis  I.  of  France,  and  Teseo's  types 
and  manuscripts  were  pillaged  or  destroyed.  Two  years  after  this 
he  is  found  retired  to  the  monastery  of  Reggio,  in  Modena. 

In  the  autumn  of  1529,  when  the  Emperor  Charles  V.  was  on  his 
way  from  Genoa  to  Bologna,  where  he  was  to  be  crowned  by  Pope 
Clement  VII.,  he  rested  in  Reggio.  Among  his  attendants  was  a 
young  German  named  John  Albert  Widmanstadt,  who  was  born 
about  1506  in  the  village  of  Nallingen,  near  ITlm,  and  was  now  some 
twenty-two  years  of  age, — who  like  Teseo  had  been  bred  a  lawyer, — 
but  had  from  childhood  eagerly  desired  to  study  the  Oriental  Tongues. 
In  his  boyhood  his  proficiency  in  Greek  had  attracted  the  notice  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


X  INTRODUCTION^   TO    THE    SYRIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

Reuchlin ;  his  early  preceptor,  Justus  Jonas,  had  laid  the  founda- 
tion for  his  knowledge  in  Hebrew ;  and  now  he  wished  to  extend 
his  studies,  and  acquaint  himself  with  other  Eastern  languages. 

Widmanstadt  having  heard  of  Teseo's  oriental  learning,  sought 
him  out  in  his  monastery,  and  as  the  youthful  student  eagerly  exam- 
ined the  contents  of  the  monastic  library,  the  aged  scholar  was  im- 
pressed with  the  thought  that  here  was  the  man  to  take  up  the  study 
of  the  Syriac  tongue,  and  carry  it  forward  to  results  which  he  him- 
self in  his  old  age  could  hardly  expect  to  attam. 

Drawing  the  student  aside  into  his  private  chamber,  and  taking 
from  his  book-case  a  copy  of  the  Gospels  in  Syriac,  obtained  prob- 
ably from  his  Maronite  teachers,  and  which  apparently  had  been 
carried  with  him  as  a  choice  treasure  to  Ravenna,  and  had  thus  es- 
caped the  fate  which  befell  the  books  and  types  left  behind  at  Pavia, 
Ambrogio  said ; 

"  For  fifteen  years  I  have  given  myself  to  the  study  of  the  Syriac 
tongue,  and  have  had  no  rival  in  my  devotion  to  it.  My  desire  is 
now  to  find  some  one  to  whom  I  may  hand  over  this  book  in  my  old 
age,  one  who  will  undertake  the  acquisition  of  the  language  hallowed 
by  the  blessed  lips  of  Christ  himself." 

Widmanstadt  willingly  offered  to  accept  the  sacred  trust,  received 
the  precious  manuscript,  and  at  once  became  the  pupil  of  Ambrogio, 
who  proceeded  then  and  there  to  instruct  him  in  the  rudiments  of 
the  Syriac,  and  finally  dismissed  him  with  written  memoranda  to 
aid  him  in  following  up  the  study,  and  with  the  parting  charge, 
"  Give  to  the  Cliurch  what  I  have  given  to  you." 

Thus  Teseo,  the  Italian  ecclesiastic, .  passed  his  only  known  copy 
of  the  Gospels  in  the  Peshitto  Syriac  version,  into  the  guardianship 
of  a  German  Emperor's  chancellor,  in  the  hope  that  he  might  be  en- 
abled to  give  to  the  church,  in  due  time,  the  precious  treasure  which 
he  had  found  so  valuable. 

Teseo  removed  later  from  Reggio  to  Ferrara,  and  secure  in  that 
strong  city,  renewed  his  types,  and  began  in  July,  1537,  to  print  his 
^^Introduction  to  the  Ghaldaic^  Syriac^  Armenian^  and  ten  other 
languages;  containing  also  alphabets  in  forty  different  languages;'''' 
from  which  work  many  of  the  facts  here  recited  have  been  derived. 

In  this  book  are  contained  the  Lord's  Prayer,  the  Parable  of  the 
Marriage  Feast  (Matthew  xxii.),  and  a  few  other  brief  extracts  from 
the  Peshitto,  this  being  the  first  specimen  of  that  version  which  was 
ever  printed.  Curiously,  in  1534,  before  leaving  Ferrara,  Ambrogio 
accidentally  lighted  on  his  lost  copy  of  the  Syriac  Psalter,  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION   TO   THE   SYRIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT.  XI 

had  disappeared  seven  years  before  in  the  sack  of  Pavia,  but  which, 
watched  over  by  God's  good  providence,  now  turned  up  in  a  saus- 
age-maker's shop,  torn  and  disfigured  but  complete. 

After  receiving  from  Ambrogio  his  priceless  manuscript  of  the 
New  Testament,  Widmanstadt  went  his  way,  and  as  he  had  oppor- 
tunity, devoted  himself  to  learned  pursuits,  especially  to  the  study  of 
the  Oriental  Tongues.  His  learning  and  abilities  secured  for  him  the 
patronage  of  eminent  persons  and  great  prelates,  by  whose  favor  he 
was  able  not  only  to  advance  his  own  interests,  but  also  to  prosecute 
his  studies.  In  Spain  and  Italy  he  had  influential  friends,  and 
through  the  archbishop  of  Capua  he  obtained  an  introduction  to 
Pope  Clement  VII.,  in  whose  presence,  in  1533,  he  was  permitted  to 
expound  the  Copemican  System  at  the  Vatican,  and  was  presented 
by  this  Pope  with  tokens  of  especial  regard.  It  now  seemed  as 
though,  through  the  favor  of  Clemeig;,  he  might  be  able  to  issue  the 
S3n-iac  Testament ;  but  the  death  of  the  Pope  in  1534  blasted  all 
these  hopes.  Still  he  pursued  the  study  of  Arabic  and  Syriac,  having 
for  an  instructor  in  Syriac,  Simeon,  a  Maronite  Bishop.  In  the  lijbrary 
of  Tolmei,  at  Sienna,  he  discovered  a  second  manuscript  of  the  Gos- 
pels  in  SyriacpWETch  he  copied  and  kept  with  that  received  from 
Teseo.  After  this,  he  entered  the  service  of  Pope  Paul  III.  He 
then  went  to  Sienna,  and  thence  to  Venice,  then  famed  for  its  print- 
ers, seeking  to  find  some  one  who  could  print  the  Syriac  Testament. 
Failing  in  this,  he  returned  to  Germany,  and  was  in  the  confidential 
employment  of  Otho,  bishop  of  Augsburg.  Subsequently  he  lived  in 
retirement  at  Landshut,  and  afterward  settled  with  his  family  in  his 
native  place,  whence  he  was  driven  by  war  into  the  Austrian  domin- 
ions, where  he  found  protection  and  favor  from  Ferdinand  King  of 
Hungary  and  Duke  of  Austria,  who  soon  became  Emperor,  and 
made  him  a  Senator,  and  subsequently  Chancellor  of  Austria. 
Through  all  these  changes  he  still  held  fast  to  his  purpose,  and  in 
1533  he  is  found  taking  counsel  with  his  old  instructor  Justus  Jonas, 
and  another  friend,  as  to  bringing  the  Syriac  language  and  the  Syr- 
iac Testament  within  the  reach  of  European  scholars ;  a  work  in  which 
others  were  to  codperate,  and  for  which  aid  was  to  come  from  an- 
other quarter. 

II.  TH^  SYRIANS  OF  KURDISTAN. 

About  the  year  1530  another  manuscript  copy  of  the  Syriac  Testa- 
ment reached  Europe  from  an  entirely  different  source.  Fifty-seven 
miles  south-east  of  Diarbekir,  in  Turkish  Kurdistan,  on  the  southern 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Xii  INTBODUCTION   TO   THE    SYBIA.C   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

declivity  of  mount  Masius,  a  conical  limestone  hill  so  steep  that  the 
roofs  of  the  lower  tier  of  houses  serve  as  a  street  for  those  above, 
stands  the  picturesque  town  of  Mardin,  3,900  feet  above  the  sea, 
overlooked  by  a  strong  castle  upon  the  summit,  and  commanding  a 
wide  view  over  the  Mesopotamian  plain.  The  Arabian  geographers 
pronounced  this  fortress  impregnable.  It  was  able  to  offer  protract- 
ed resistance  to  the  Mongolian  conqueror,  Hulagu,  and  afterwards 
to  the  armies  of  Timur,  the  Tartar,  in  1395;  and  the  castle,  for  hun- 
dreds of  years  was  the  residence  of  princes,  more  or  less  independent. 

In  those  old  days,  when  men  whose  kingdom  was  "  of  this  world," 
and  whose  servants  were  therefore  willing  to  fight,  had  assumed  au- 
thority over  the  flock  of  God,  and  had  established  organizations  in 
which  politics  was  more  potent  than  piety,  and  where  faith, — instead 
of  coming  by  hearing,  and  hearing  by  the  word  of  God, — was  settled 
by  the  decisions  of  councils  anc^the  decrees  of  despots ;  when  Paul's 
question,  "  Lord,  what  wilt  thou  have  me  to  do  ?  "  had  been  largely 
superseded  by  Peter's  question,  "  What  shall  this  man  do  ? "  when 
men  disputed  about  things  which  they  did  not  understand,  and  per- 
secuted people  who  chanced  to  know  more  or  less  than  they  did ; 
there  arose  a  bitter  controversy  concerning  the  Incarnation  and  its 
results ;  some  holding  that  in  the  person  of  the  Saviour  were  two 
distinct  natures,  one  human,  the  other  divine ;  others  holding  that 
the  result  of  the  incarnation  was  one  unique  nature,  human  and  divine. 

This  ancient  town  of  Mardin,  "  a  city  set  upon  a  hill  "  that "  cannot 
be  hid,"  with  its  population  of  fifteen  to  eighteen  thousand,  is  to-day 
the  headquarters  of  a  community  of  Syrian  Christians,  known  to 
the  outside  world  as  Monophysites  or  believers  in  "one  nature," 
otherwise  called  by  outsiders  Jacobites ;  from  the  fact  that  in  the 
days  when  the  Emperor  Justinian  endeavored  to  establish  orthodoxy 
and  crush  out  heresy  by  persecutions  and  penalties,  one  Jacob  Bar- 
adaeus,  ordained  it  is  said  by  men  who  were  already  imprisoned  by 
imperial  edict ;  poor,  but  energetic  and  determined  beyond  belief ; 
disguised  as  a  beggar,  and  furnished  by  one  of  his  disciples,  an  Arab 
chief,  with  the  fleetest  of  dromedaries,  for  thirty-three  years,  till  578, 
traversed  the  East  as  on  the  wings  of  the  wind,  defied  imperial  edicts, 
rallied  his  distressed  and  discouraged  brethren,  ordained  clergy  by 
thousands,  and  so  provided  anew  set  of  guardians  and  defenders  of 
the  sacred  Scriptures,  who,  in  their  separated  worship,  still  preserved, 
and  cherished  the  same  Syriac  Bible  which  was  treasured  by  the  or- 
thodox Syrian  church,  and  by  all  the  different  sects  and  branches 
thereof  who  used  the  Syrian  tongue. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTKODUCTIUN    TO    THE    SYRIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT.  Xlll 

Of  these  Syrians  some  six  hundred  still  reside  in  Mardin,  which  is 
the  seat  of  their  theological  library,  school,  and  other  institutions. 
There  are  in  the  vicinity  of  Mardin  some  two  thousand  of  them,  and 
within  a  few  days  journey  round  about,  they  number  not  far  from 
fifty-five  thousand.  They  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  one  nature  in 
Christ.  Their  learned  men  object  to  the  title  of  Monophysites,  which 
is  appropriated  to  the  doctrine  of  Eutyches,  which  they  deny  that 
they  hold ;  they  also  discard  the  name  Jacobites,  applied  to  them  by 
their  enemies ;  but  are  properly  known  as  Syrians  and  claim  to  be 
in  the  succession  from  the  church  planted  at  Antioch. 

This  people  had  been  for  ages  possessors  of  the  same  Syriac  Bible 
which  the  Maronites  had  preserved,  and  in  which  Widmanstadt  was 
so  deeply  interested ;  and  in  former  times  the  patriarchal  monastery 
of  Zaafr&n,  about  four  miles  north  of  Mardin,  was  famed  as  having 
"  the  largest  library  to  be  found  among  the  Syrians,  having  books  in 
twelve  different  languages." 

In  the  autumn  of  1533,  having  attended  his  royal  master  at  a 
meeting  of  German  Princes  in  Heilbronn,  while  returning  to  Vien- 
na, Widmanstadt  unexpectedly  met  a  Syrian  priest,  Moses  of  Mar- 
din, who  had  come  from  Italy  to  find  him. 

Three  or  four  years  before,  this  Moses  who  was  not  a  Maronite, 
but  who  came  from  Mardin  in  Mesopotamia,  the  seat  of  the  Syrian 
patriarchs,  and  who  described  himself  as  A  Disciple  and  Legate  of 
Dionysius,  j>atriarch  of  Antioch,  sent  to  the  Popes  to  abjure  certain 
erroi-s  of  the Tffonophy site  heresy,  and  to  seek  protection,  favor,  and 
the  means  of  printing  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  came  to  Rome.  He 
remained  there  some  time,  but  received  little  encouragement  or  help. 
He  went  to  Venice,  attracted  probably  by  the  fame  of  Aldus  and 
Bomberg,  the  eminent  printers  of  that  city,  but  met  only  failure, 
until  he  fell  in  with  Guillaume  Postel,  a  brilliant  and  erratic  French- 
man, who  had  recently  returned  from  the  East,  and  brought  with 
him  from  Damascus  a  manuscript  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  for 
Bomberg.  He  had  formerly  known  Ambrogio,  who  had  taught  him 
the  elements  of  Syriac  and  other  tongues,  and  had  also  known  Wid- 
manstadt ;  and  he  advised  Moses  of  Mardin  to  go  to  Widmanstadt. 
To  get  there  was  not  an  easy  matter ;  but  about  that  time,  in  June 
1553,  on  the  death  of  Edward  VI.,  Mary  ascended  the  throne  of 
England,  and  Pope  Julius  determined  to  send  Cardinal  Reginald 
Pole  to  remove  the  interdict  from  her  kingdom.  Moses  obtained 
an  introduction  to  Pole,  perhaps  through  the  Pope's  commendation, 
and  so  in  September,  as  Pole  started  on  his  journey,  in  the  train  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XIV  INTRODUCTION   TO    THE    SYRIAC    NKW    TESTAMENT. 

the  legate  of  the  Roman  Pontiff,  went  this  messenger  of  the  Syrian 
patriarch  on  his  journey  northward. 

Their  first  recorded  halting  place  was  Augsburg.  Thence  they 
proceeded  to  Dillingen,  and  it  was  perhaps  at  this  place  that  the 
Syrian  priest  met  the  German  statesman ;-  the  two  having  a  common 
object  in  view,  which  had  been  the  hope  of  Widmanstadt  for  years, 
and  which  had  sent  Moses  from  Asia  to  Europe,  and  across  the  Alps 
from  Italy  to  Germany. 

Widmanstadt  conducted  Moses  to  Vienna ;  and  presented  him  to 
Ferdinand,  who  at  once  consented  to  bear  the  expense  of  printing  the 
Syriac  Testament,  pa,ying  Moses  a  salary  to  superintend  the  work ; 
Widmanstadt  rendering  such  assistance  as  his  public  duties  permit- 
ted. The  artist,  Caspar  Crapht,  engraved  in  steel  the  punches  for 
striking  the  matrices,  a  "beautiful  font  of  type  was  cast  in  tin,  and 
Michael  Cymbermann  (or  Zimmerman)  was  the  printer.  The  Gospels 
were  struck  off  on  May  18,  1555,  the  Pauline  Epistles  July  18,  the 
Acts  August  14,  and  the  book  was  completed  September  27  ;  being 
the  Editio  Princeps  of  the  entire  Syriac  New  Testament,  excepting 
the  Apocalypse,  II.  Peter,  II.  and  III.  John,  and  Jude. 

Thus  from  two  distinct  communities,  in  Lebanon  and  Mardin, 
came  the  manuscripts  upon  whose  authority  was  given  to  the  world 
the  first  printed  edition  of  the  Syriac  Testament.  These  religious 
bodies,  separated  in  locality,  in  faith,  and  unity,  having  no  commun- 
ion, and  very  little  in  common  with  each  other,  yet  held  fast  this 
faithful  Word  as  the  anchor  of  their  hope,  the  lamp  of  their  feet, 
and  the  light  of  their  path. 

The  work  being  done,  and  a  thousand  copies  printed,  Moses 
received  200  of  them,  that  they  might  be  placed  in  the  Syrian 
Churches ;  but  for  some  reason  he  sold  them  in  Europe,  and  thus 
measurably  defeated  the  object  of  their  issue.  But  the  book  at  last 
was  printed,  and  came  into  the  hands  of  scholars,  and  since  then  has 
never  been  lost  sight  of  among  the  learned. 

Fourteen  years  after  the  printing  of  the  Syriac  Testament  by 
Widmanstadt,  in  1555,  the  Christian  Jew  Treraellius,  issued  an  edi- 
tion of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  in  Hebrew  characters,  dedicated 
to  Queen  Elisabeth ;  while  at  the  same  time  under  the  patronage  of 
Queen  Elisabeth's  brother-in-law,  Philip  II.  of  Spain,  a  third  edition 
of  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  in  the  Syriac  character,  repeated  in 
Hebrew  letters  at  the  bottom  of  the  page,  was  issued  as  a  part  of  the 
great  Antwerp  Polyglott,  edited  by  Arius  Montanus;  who  for  thir- 
teen years  gave  incredible  toil  to  this  work.     Sixteen  hundred  dozen 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    SYRIAC    NEW   TESTAMENT.  XV 

skins  were  bought  for  the  work,  which  was  issued  in  eight  splendid 
volumes,  1572-3;  five  hundred  copies  being  printed,  many  of  which 
were  lost  at  sea !  While  the  Duke  of  Alva  was  doing  his  terrible 
work  in  the  Netherlands,  the  proof  sheets  of  this  book  of  peace  and 
blessing  were  passing  to  and  fro  between  Antwerp  and  Madrid ;  and 
to-day  among  the  choice  treasures  of  the  British  Museum,  spotless  in 
page  and  brilliant  in  ink  as  when  it  issued  from  Plantin's  printing 
office,  stands  a  copy  of  those  splendid  folios,  presented  by_ Arias 
Montanus  in  his  master's  name,  to  his  terrible  viceroy,  "as  an  eternal 
"'monument  of  Alva's  piety,  'from  the  best  of  monarchs  to  the  best  of 
ministers.'  "  Other  editions  were  issued,  so  that  before  the  close  of 
the  year  1600,  seven  editions  had  appeared,  including  the  one  in  the 
Antwerp  Polyglott.  Five  more  were  added  during  the  seventeenth 
century,  two  being  the  text  contained  in  the  Paris  and  the  London 
Polyglotts.  And  when  Schaaf  published  his  edition,  in  1709,  he  reck- 
oned it  as  the  thirteenth. 

The  importance  of  this  Syriac  version  of  the  Scriptures  was  speed- 
ily recognized ;  and  sharp  controversies  arose  concerning  its  age  and 
origin.  The  book  itself  however,  remained  locked  in  the  treasuries 
of  the  learned,  few  being  able  to  examine  it,  and  the  great  bulk  of 
Christian  people  being  deprived  of  the  opportunity  of  using  it.  But 
though  a  century  passed  away  during  which  no  great  progress  was 
made  in  Syrian  studies  and  researches,  yet  the  Syriac  Testament  was 
not  forgotten,  and  circumstances  occurred  which  brought  it  more 
distinctly  to  the  attention  of  the  Christian  public.  Among  these 
may  be  mentioned  the  researches  of  Dr.  Claudius  Buchanan  among 
another  class  of  custodians  of  the  Syriac  Scriptures. 

III.  THE  SYRIAN  CHRISTIANS  OF  MALABAR. 

Eusebius  in  his  Ecclesiastical  History,  (Bk.  v.  c.  10),  in  writing  of 
the  early  evangelists,  tells  us  of  one  "most  distinguished  for  learn- 
ing,"  and  who  was  afterwards  the  first  President  of  the  Theological 
School  at  Alexandria,  whose  name  was  Pantaenus,  and  who,  in  his 
evangelistic  journeyings,  about  a.  d.  190,  traveled  as  far  as  the 
Indies,  "And  the  report  is  that  he  there  found  his  own  arrival 
anticipated  by  some  who  there  were  acquainted  with  the  Gospel  of 
Matthew,  to  whom  Bartholomew,  one  of  the  apostles,  had  preached, 
and  left  them  tJie  gospel  of  Matthew  in  the  Hebrew,  which  was  also 
preserved  to  this  time." 

At  the  Council  of  Nice,  in  a.  d.  325,  a  Bishop  named  John  signed 
the  decrees  as  "  Metropolitan  of  Persia  and  of  Great  India."    For 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XVI  INTBODUCTION   TO    THE    STBIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

ages  the  knowledge  of  any  such  church  or  community  was  lost  to  the 
European  world.  But  when  the  Portuguese  arrived  in  India  in  1498 
they  found  to  their  surprise,  upwards  of  one  hundred  Christian 
churches  on  the  coast  of  Malabar.  "  These  churches,"  said  they, 
"belong  to  the  Pope."  "  Who  is  the  Pope  ?"  said  the  natives ;  "  We 
never  heard  of  him." 

The  Christians  of  Malabar  used  an  ancient  Syriac  Liturgy.  They 
jealously  preserved  ancient  manuscripts  of  the  Peshitto  version  of 
the  Scriptures.  They  knew  nothing  of  "  the  Latin  Obedience,"  the 
Latin  liturgy,  or  the  Latin  scriptures.  Skirting  the  vast  realms  of 
heathenism  that  lay  back  of  them,  they  were  witnesses  for  the' true 
scriptures  and  the  gospel  of  the  Son  of  God. 

When  the  Portuguese  became  sufficiently  strong  they  invaded 
these  churches,  and  condemned  some  of  the  clergy  to  death  as  here- 
tics. Then  for  the  first  time  the  Syrians  of  Malabar  heard  of  the 
Inquisition  and  its  tires  at  Goa.  One  Bishop  was  burned,  and  another 
sent  prisoner  to  Lisbon. 

In  1599  the  Roman  Catholic  Archbishop  Menezes  convened  a 
synod  at  J>iamper^  or  Udiamparua,  near  Cochin,  in  a  church  still  stand- 
ing. It  was  there  laid  to  the  charge  of  the  one  hundred  and  fifty 
Syrian  clergy  present,  that  they  had  married  wives ;  that  they  owned 
only  two  sacraments, — baptism  and  the  Lord's  Supper;  that  they 
neither  invoked  saints  nor  worshiped  images  nor  believed  in  Purga- 
tory. These  tenets  they  were  called  upon  to  abjure.  And  though 
no  Bibles  were  destroyed,  it  was  decreed  that  all  the  Syrian  books  on 
ecclesiastical  subjects  should  be  burned,  "in  order  that  no  pretended 
apostolical  monuments  might  remain." 

The  churches  on  the  sea-coast,  helpless  under  compulsion,  acknowl- 
edged the  supremacy  of  the  Pope,  buc  refused  to  pray  in  Latin,  and 
insisted  on  retaining  their  own  language  and  liturgy.  The  churches 
in  the  interior  refused  to  yield  to  the  decree,  or  after  a  show  of  sub- 
mission, proclaimed  eternal  war  against  the  inquisition,  "hid  their 
books,  fled  occasionally  to  the  mountains  for  refuge,  and  sought  pro- 
tection of  the  native  princes,  who  had  always  been  proud  of  their 
alliance.  Some  also  who  had  yielded  to  Rome,  wearied  of  the  bond, 
and  on  May  22nd,  1653,  held  an  assembly  atAlingatte,  when  a  host 
of  them,  headed  by  the  Metropolitan,  left  the  Romisti  communion. 
In  1663,  Malabar  was  conquered  by  th^  Dutch,  and  thus  they  were 
relieved  from  the  fear  of  Romish  oppression,  but  remained  in  obscu- 
rity for  generations,  until  in  1806,  Dr.  Claudius  Buchanan,  desiring  to 
learn  something  of  the  condition  of  this  ancient  people,  investigate 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTBODUCTION   TO    THE    SYBIAC   NBW   TESTAMENT.  XVU 

their  literature  and  history,  collect  Biblical  manuscripts,  and  open 
ways  for  them  to  translate  the  Scriptures  into  the  native  languages 
of  India;  under  authority  from  Lord  Welleslev.  proceeded  to  the  hills 
at  the  bottom  of  the  Ghauts  which  divide  the  Camatic  from  Malay- 
ala,  now  known  as  Travao^ore  and  Malabar. 

On  arriving  there  he  found  numerous  Christian  churches,  and  ap 
proaching  a  town  in  the  evening  he  heard  the  sound  of  bells  among 
the  hills,  which  he  says,  "made  me  for  a  moment  forget  tl  at  I  was  in 
Hindostan,  and  reminded  me  of  another  country.  The  tirst  Syrian 
church  which  I  saw  was  at  Mavelikar.  The  Syrians  here  had  often 
been  visited  by  Romish  emissaries.  They  had  heard  of  the  Eng- 
-  lish,  but  supposed  that  they  belonged  to  the  ct  urch  of  the  Pope. 
They  could  not  believe  that  I  was  come  with  any  friendly  purpose. 
I  had  some  discussion  with  a  most  intelligent  priest  in  regard  to  the 
original  language  of  the  Gospels,  which  he  maintained  to  be  Syriac." 

" '  How  shall  we  know,'  said  he,  '  that  your  standard  copy  of  the 
Bible  is  a  true  translation  ?  We  cannot  depart  from  our  own  Bible. 
It  is  the  true  book  of  God,  without  corruption,  that  book  which  was 
first  used  by  the  Christians  of  Antioch.  What  translations  you  have  / 
got  in  the  West,  we  know  not ;,  but  the  trice  Bible  of  Antioch  we 
have  had  in  the  mountains  of  Malabar  for  fourteen  hundred  years^ 
or  longer.  Some  oT  our"  copies  are  from  ancient  times,  so  old  and  ' 
decayed  that  they  can  scarcely  be   preserved  much   longer.' " 

" '  You  concede,'  said  he,  *  that  our  Saviour  spoke  in  our  language ; 
how  do  you  know  it  ?'  '  From  Syriac  expressions  in  the  Greek  Gospels. 
He  spoke  Syriac  when  He  walked  by  the  way  {Ephphatha)^  and  when 
He  sat  in  the  house  ( Talitha  Cumi)^  and  when  He  was  upon  the 
cross  {Eli^  Eli^  lama  sahachthani)^  The  Syrian  was  pleased  when 
he  heard  that  we  had  got  their  language  in  our  English  books.  *  But,' 
added  he,  *  if  the  parables  and  discourses  of  our  Lord  were  in  Syriac, 
and  the  people  of  Jerusalem  commonly  used  it,  is  it  not  marvellous 
that  His  disciples  did  not  record  His  words  in  the  Syriac,  and  that 
they  should  have  recourse  to  the  Greek  ? '  I  observed  that  Greek  was 
then  the  universal  language,  and  therefore  Providence  selected  it. 
'  It  is  very  probable,'  said  he  '  that  the  Gospels  were  translated  im- 
mediately afterwards  into  Greek,  as  into  other  languages  ;  but  surely 
there  must  have  been  a  Syriac  original.  The  poor  people  in  Jerusa- 
lem could  not  read  Greek.  Had  they  no  record  in  their  hands  of 
Christ's  parables  which  they  had  heard,  and  of  his  sublime  discours- 
es recorded  by  St.  John  after  his  ascension?'  I  acknowledged  that 
it  was  believed  by  some  of  the  learned  that  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XVlll  INTBODUCTION   TO    THB    SYBIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

was  written  originally  in  Syriac.  'So  you  admit  St.  Matthew 
— you  may  as  well  admit  St.  John.  Or  was  one  Gospel  enough  for 
the  inhabitants  of  Jerusalem  ?'  I  contended  that  there  were  many 
Greek  and  Roman  words  in  their  own  Syriac  Gospels.  '  True,'  said 
he,  '  Roman  words  for  Roman  things.'  " 

"  At  Chingandr  I  was  received  at  the  Church  by  three  Presbyters, 
and  the  people  came  round  me.  The  sight  of  the  women  assured  me 
that  I  was  once  more  in  a  Christian  country.  In  every  countenance 
I  thought  I  could  discover  the  intelligence  of  Christianity.  I  said 
to  the  senior  priest.  You  appear  to  me  like  a  people  who  have 
known  better  days.  'It  is  even  so,'  said  he;  'the  glory  of  our 
Church  has  passed  away,  but  we  hope  your  nation  will  revive  it 
again.'  I  observed  that  the  glory  of  a  Church  could  never  die,  if  it 
preserved  the  Bible.  '  We  have  preserved  the  Bible,'  said  he,  '  but 
the  learning  of  it  is  in  a  low  state.  Our  copies  are  few  in  number; 
and  the  writing  out  a  whole  copy  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  is  a  great 
labour.'  I  then  produced  a  printed  copy  of  the  Syriac  N'ew  Testa- 
ment. Not  one  of  them  had  ever  seen  a  printed  copy  before.  They 
admired  it  much ;  and  every  priest,  as  it  came  into  his  hands,  began 
to  read  a  portion  fluently,  while  the  women  came  round  to  hear,  I 
asked  the  old  priest  whether  I  should  send  them  some  copies  from 
Europe.  'They  would  be  worth  their  weight  in  silver,'  said  he.  He 
asked  me  whether  the  Old  Testament  was  printed  in  Syriac  as  well 
as  the  New.  I  told  him  it  was,  but  I  had  not  a  copy.  They  pro- 
fessed an  earnest  desire  for  some  copies  of  the  whole  Syriac  Bible, 
and  asked  whether  it  would  be  practicable  to  obtain  one  copy  for 
every  church.  The  priest  said,  '  The  Syriac  is  now  only  the  learned 
language,  and  that  of  the  Church,  but  we  generally  expound  the 
Scriptures  to  the  people  in  the  vernacular'  (Malay41im)." 

At  Kandenad,  the  residence  of  Mar  Dionysius  the  Metropolitan, 
an  eminently  pious  man,  Dr.  Buchanan  spoke  of  preparing  a  transla- 
tion and  printing  the  Holy  Scriptures  in  Malayalim,  and  received 
the  heartiest  assurance  of  approval  and  co-operation.  In  Angamalej^ 
one  of  the  most  remote  Syrian  towns,  he  found  many  valuable  man- 
uscripts ;  among  them  one  large  folio,  having  three  columns  on  a 
page,  containing  the  Old  and  New  Testaments,  written  with  beauti- 
ful accuracy  'upon  strong  vellum.  He  says :  "  I  scarcely  expected 
that  the  Syrian  church  would  have  parted  with  this  manuscript,  but 
the  Bishop  was  pleased  to  present  it  to  me,  saying.  It  will  be  safer 
in  your  hands  than  in  our  own.  And  yet,  said  he,  we  have  kept  it 
as  some  think  for  near  a  thousand  years." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION   TO    THE    SYRIAC   NEW    TESTAMENT.  XIX 

"  I  wish,"  said  Dr.  Buchanan,  "  that  England  may  be  able  to  keep 
it  a  thousand  years."     This  copy  is  now  at  Cambridge  in  England. 

When  Dr.  Buchanan  returned  in  failing  health  to  England,  he  ap- 
pealed to  the  Bible  Society  for  an  edition  of  the  Scriptures  in  Syri- 
ac ;  for  though  he  wished  to  send  a  copy  to  the  Syrian  Bishops  as  an 
earnest  of  more  to  come,  he  could  not  find  one  copy  of  the  Syri- 
ac  Bible  in  a  separate  volume  for  sale  in  the  entire  Kingdom. 

In  1807,  Dr.  Buchanan  visited  Travancore  a  second  time,  and  car- 
ried the  manuscript  of^rchbishop  Dionysius's  translation  of  the 
New  Testament  into  Malay sllim,  to  Bombay  to  be  printed.  Five 
thousand  copies  of  the  Gospels  were  printed  at  the  expense  of  the 
British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society,  and  within  the  last  seventy  or 
eighty  years,  between  three  and  four  hundred  thousand  Bibles  or 
portions  of  the  same  have  been  printed  by  the  Bible  Society  in  Ma- 
layalim  for  the  use  of  these  Syrian  Churches — which  according  to  the 
government  census  of  1836  numbered  118,382  souls,  while  the  Romo 
-Syrians  numbered  56,184. 

Several  editions  of  the  Syriac  Bible  and  the  New  Testament  have 
since  been  published,  in  England  and  America,  and  the  Syriac  ver- 
sion has  received  some  degree  of  the  attention  which  its  importance 
and  its  merits  demanded.  But  the  accessible  manuscripts  were  few, 
and  facilities  for  careful,  critical  study  of  the  Text  were  yet  lacking ; 
yet  He  who  had  so  wondrously  watched  over  this  version  of  the  Sa- 
cred Scriptures,  had  other  witnesses  to  its  purity  and  integrity,  to 
be  brought  to  notice  in  due  time. 

IV.  THE  SYRIAN  CHRISTIANS  OF  URUMIAH. 

Starting  at  a  little  distance  from  the  site  of  old  Nineveh,  on  the 
eastern  bank  of  the  Tigris,  opposite  the  present  city  of  Mosul,  there 
stretches  away  to  the  north-east  a  mountainous  region,  extending 
a  hundred  and  fifty  miles  toward  Lake  Urtimiah, — a  body  of  salt  wa- 
ter some  eighty  miles  in  length,  and  thirty  in  breadth,  on  the  western 
shore  of  which  is  a  magnificent  fertile  plain,  situated  in  the  province 
of  Ur^miah,  at  the  eastern  base  of  the  Kurdish  mountains.  It  is 
about  forty  miles  in  length,  lying  upon  the  central  section  of  the  lake, 
and  about  twenty  miles  wide  in  its  broadest  parts.  Twelve  miles 
back  from  the  lake,  and  two  miles  from  the  mountains,  lies  the  city 
of  Urdmiah,  the  ancient  Thebarma,  the  birth  place,  according  to  tra- 
dition, of  Zoroaster,  founder  of  the  religion  of  the  fire  worshipers ;  and 
a  possible  confirmation  of  the  tradition  is  found  in  the  fact  that  there 
are  on  different  parts  of  the  plain  several  artificial  mounds,  covering 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XX  INTRODUCTION    TO    THB    8YRIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

an  acre  or  more  each,  rising  to  a  height  of  from  fifty  to  seventy  feet 
which  appear  like  vast  piles  of  ashes  accumulated  in  the  lapse  of 
many  centuries,  from  the  perpetual  fires  connected  with  their  wor- 
ship. 

In  this  city  of  Urtimiah,  among  a  population  of  from  thirty  to  forty 
thousand,  is  a  community  known  as  Nestorians,^  comprising  five  or 
six  hundred  souls.  Upon  this  great  plain,  with  adjacent  declivities 
of  the  mountains,  comprising  an  area  of  about  six  hundred  square 
miles,  are  scattered  some  three  hundred  and  thirty  villages;  and 
among  these  villages  are  also  numbers  of  Nestorians.  Besides  these 
in  other  provinces  and  in  the  wildest  parts  of  the  Kurdish  mountains, 
in  districts  so  rough  that  only  the  most  sure  footed  mule  can  travel 
over  them,  are  scattered  communities  of  the  same  lineage  and  faith. 
The  whole  number  of  this  peculiar  people  has  been  estimated  at  about 
140,000.  They  are  of  good  stature,  with  regular,  manly,  intelligent 
features,  dark  complexion,  and  are  bold,  generous,  kind,  brave,  and 
as  independent  as  they  can  be  under  Mohammedan  rule. 

Their  vernacular,  though  corrupted  and  barbarized  by  P^sian, 
Syriac,  Kurdish,  and  Turkish  words,  is  regarded  by  modem  scholars, 
in  the  words  of  Dr.  'William  Wright,  of  Cambridge,  England,  "  as  a 
representative  of  the  old  Eastern  Aramaic,  not  descended  directly 
from  the  more  ancient  language  we  usually  call  Syriac,  but  from  a 
lost  sister  tongue."  But  the  Ancient  Syriac  has  been  for  ages  their 
literary  and  ecclesiastical  tongue ;  their  correspon  dence  is  often  con- 
ducted in  it;  their  Holy  Scriptures  and  Church  Rituals,  as  well  as 
nearly  all  other  books  they  may  have,  are  written  in  the  ancient  Syr- 
iac, and  their  educated  clergy  are  able  to  converse  in  that  tongue. 

This  community,   known   as    Nestorian,  though  they    reject  the 

*Ia  using  the  names  assigned  to  these  different  religious  bodies,  it  is  only  just  to  remind 
the  reader  that  they  are  not  always  accepted  by  the  people  to  whom  they  are  applied.  Th** 
80  called  Nestorians  refuse  to  bearJihat  title,  the  Nestorian  Bishop,  Mar  YohanDan,  Raying 
to  the  missionary  Justin  Perkins,  "  We  shall  very  soon  be  at  war  if  you  do  not  cease  calling 
us  Nestorians."  They  declare  themselves  not  the  followers  of  Nestorius,  but  Syrian  or  Chal- 
dean Christians,  complaining  that  the  church  of  Rome  has  arrogated  that  name  and  applied 
it  to  a  few  of  their  number  whqhad  been  withdrawn  from  their  communion  by  Roman  Cath- 
olic missionaries/f  Dr.  Southgate,  in  his  vis  t  to  the  Syrian  church  of  Mesopotamia  says: 
'  They  are  not  pttperly  Eutycheans;  they  discard  the  name  of  Jacobites  as  not  properly 
applicable  to  their  churches.  The  Patriarch  once  rebuked  me  for  calling  his  people  Jac<H)- 
ites,  and  said  it  was  a  term  given  them  by  their  enemies.  The  Latins  do  their  utinost  to  fix 
it  upon  them."  It  pPAms^  f,^  bUYf.been  ajavorite  device  of  jthe  devil  Wa^fy^^g  ^"  nick-name, 
and  thus  separate  and  persecute  llie  pyup!5  ur  iSrod,  I'or  whose  uiiity  the  isavi'our  so  etJ^iicollj 
prayed.  Perhaps  the  pious  reader  will  approve  this  sentiment  of  John  Bunyan:  **  Since  you 
desire  to  know  by  what  name  I  wish  to  be  called,  I  desire  to  be,  and  I  hope  I  am,  a  Chris- 
tian; and  I  desire,  if  God  should  count  me  worthy,  to  be  called  a  Christian,  a  believer,  or 
any  other  such  name  which  is  sanctioned  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  And  as  for  those  factious  titles 
of  Anabaptists,  Presbyterians,  Independents,  and  the  like,  I  believe  they  came  neither  from 
Jerusalem  or  Antioch,  but  rather  from  hell  and  Babylon,  for  they  naturally  tend  to  divisions, 
and  ye  may  know  them  by  their  fruits." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTKODUCTION   TO   THE    8YBIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT.  XXI 

designation,  calling  themselves  Stlryee  or  Syrians,  are  the  remnant 
of  a  once  great  and  influential  people,  who,  in  their  prosperous  days, 
were  numerous  through  all  the  vast  regions  from  Palestine  to  China, 
and  who  planted  the  Gospel  even  in  the  heart  of  northern  China 
itself.  Their  Patriarchs  dwelt  in  Ctesiphon  and  Selucia,  but  re- 
moved to  Bagdad,  the  capital  of  the  Saracen  empire,  about  the  year 
732,  and  finally  settled  at  Mosul  in  1559.  Sometimes,  as  under  the 
policy  of  Ghengis  Khan,  they  occupied  high  positions  in  camp  and 
court.  Again,  under  the  rule  of  the  bloody  Timurlane,  they  were 
slaughtered  till  only  a  scattered  flock  remained,  except  in  the  inac- 
cessible mountain  fastnesses;  but  for  nearly  fifteen  hundred  years, 
whether  in  peace  or  in  persecution,  in  prosperity  or  adversity,  they 
have  held  fast  their  faith,  and  continue  to  do  so  to  this  day. 

Their  origin  is  well  known.  Nestorius,  born  and  educated  in  Syr- 
ia, a  presbyter  at  Antioch,  was  made  Bishop  of  Constantinople,  a.  d. 
428.  Three  years  after,  he  was  arraigned  and  excommunicated  by 
the  third  general  Council  at  Ephesus,  because  he  would  not  call  the 
Virgin  Mary  "  the  mother  of  God ;"  and  also,  as  they  said,  because  he 
invested  Christ  with  "  two  persons,"  as  well  as  "  two  natures," — a 
charge  which  he  persistently  denied.  Condemned  unheard,  cut  off 
from  the  church,  and  deposed  from  his  office,  he  was  banished  to 
Arabia  Petra.  Four  years  later  he  was  transported  to  one  of  the 
oases  of  Lybia,  and  finally  died  in  upper  Egypt.  Of  course  his  ex- 
communication created  much  sympathy.  His  countrymen  in  the  East 
espoused  his  cause,  particularly  the  Syrians  in  Edessa,  Mesopotamia, 
the  seat  of  a  great  theological  school ;  and  the  body  which  thus  sym- 
pathized with  him,  became  strong,  powerful,  and  influential,  until  un- 
der the  long  continued  oppressions  of  Mohammedan  rulers,  they  have 
been  accounted  as  sheep  for  the  slaughter,  and  are  so  reduced  that 
there  is  but  a  remnant  left. 

About  1825  the  celebrated  English  traveler,  Joseph  Wolff  visited 
Urtimiah.  The  Syrian  clergy  mourned  the  scarcity  of  their  sacred 
books,  especially  the  Scriptures,  and  said,  «  We  have  heard  that  the 
EngUsh  can  write  a  thousand  copies  in  one  day,  will  they  not  write 
several  thousand  copies  and  send  them  to  us."  A  copy  of  their  Gos- 
pels  was  given  to  Wolff  by  Mar  Yohanan,  one  of  their  bishops,  and 
from  this  afterwards  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  in  1827 
printed  a  considerable  edition  with  type  specially  prepared  for  it. 
This  was  doubtless  the  first  printing  done  in  the  Nest ori an  square 
character. 

In   1830   Eli  Smith  and  H.  G.  O.  Dwight  were  deputed  by  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXU      INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SYRIAO  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

American  Board  of  Commissioners  of  Foreign  Missions,  to  make  a 
missionary  tour  through  Armenia  and  Persia.  They  passed  an  inter- 
esting week  among  the  Nestorians  of  Urtimiah  and  vicinity,  and 
learned  many  important  facts  concerning  that  remarkable  people. 
Under  oppression  they  have  become  poor,  and  have  had  little  oppor- 
tunity for  advancement.  They  have  but  few  books ;  the  library  of 
the  Patriarch,  which  was  regarded  as  exceptionally  large,  contained 
only  sixty  volumes,  part  of  which  were  duplicates.  They  had  no 
printed  books  among  them,  and  their  alphabet  had  probably  never 
been  in  type;  but  there  were  manuscript  copies  of  the  Psalter,  the 
Gospels,  and  Epistles,  in  separate  volumes,  some  of  them  hundreds 
of  years  old.  Two  churches  possessed  the  Pentateuch,  but  no  entire 
copy  of  the  Bible  was  heard  of.  In  the  village  of  Koosy,  they  heard 
of  a  venerable  sacred  book,  written,  according  to  the  date  inserted 
by  the  writer,  three  hundred  years  before  the  Mohammedan  era, 
which  would  be  about  a.  d.  322.  They  visited  the  house  of  the 
priest  where  it  was  kept,  and  the  by-standers  reverently  uncovered 
their  heads  as  he  opened  the  box  which  contained  the  Sacred 
Volume,  and  carefully  removed  one  by  one  ten  silk  bags  and  hand- 
kerchiefs which  covered  it,  disclosing  at  last  a  neat  and  well-pre- 
served copy  of  the  Peshitto  Syriac  New  Testament,  written  upon 
parchment,  in  small  Estrangelo  characters.  A  subsequent  examina- 
tion showed  that  this  New  Testament  MSS.  was  not  perhaps  more 
than  700  years  old, — though  it  may  have  been  copied  from  a  MS. 
bearing  the  earlier  date.  No  offer  to  purchase  this  manuscript 
would  be  listened  to  by  them  for  a  moment;  and  of  their  other 
books,  as  they  had  only  single  copies  for  their  own  use,  none  could 
be  bought ;  but  since  that  time  many  manuscripts  of  the  Peshitto 
New  Testament  have  come  from  this  people  to  America  through  the 
American  Mission.  They  may  be  found  in  Boston,  New  York,  and 
in  private  Libraries,  and  date  about  the  end  of  the  twelfth  century. 

Among  these  isolated  believers,  so  long  separated  from  other  Chris- 
tians, later  explorers  were  able  to  find  the  Peshitto  Syriac  version  of 
the  whole  Bible,  with  the  exception  of  the  epistle  of  Jude,  second 
and  third  John,  second  Peter,  Revelation,  the  account  of  the  woman 
taken  in  adultery,  John  viii.  3 — 11,  and  the  passage    in  1  John,  v.  7. 

A  mission  was  speedily  established  among  those  churches  ;  Syriac 
Bibles  were  supplied,  The  New  Testament  in  ancient  and  modem 
Syriac  in  parallel  columns  has  been  printed  for  their  use,  and  editions 
of  the  Syriac  Bible  have  been  prepared  for  this  people,  who  have  so 
long  and  so  faithfully  preserved  the  living  Word  of  God.     Beset  by 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTEODUCTION    TO    THE    SYBIAC   NEW    TESTAMENT.  XXlll 

hordes  of  enemies,  conquered,  slaughtered,  outraged  and  wronged ; 
subjected  to  the  unspeakable  methods  of  oriental  tyranny ;  deprived 
of  education,  demoralized  by  contact  with  surrounding  barbarism, — 
yet  notwithstanding  all,  they  have  held  fast  the  faithful  word ;  and  to 
them  has  been  fulfilled  in  some  degree  that  ancient  promise,  '^Because 
thou  hast  kept  the  word  of  my  patience,  I  will  also  keep  thee  from 
the  hour  of  temptation,  which  shall  come  upon  all  the  world  to  try 
them  that  dwell  upon  the  earth." 

V.  THE  MELKITES. 

When  in  the  fifth  century  the  opinions  of  Eutyches  and  Nestorius 
regarding  our  Saviour  came  to  be  widely  discussed,  and  the  Councils 
of  Ephesus  and  Chalcedon  had  uttered  their  decisions  regarding 
them ;  the  Emperor  Marcian  who  died  a.  d.  457  supporting  the  de- 
cision of  the  Calcedonian  Council ;  a  widespread  division  occurred 
among  the  churches,  the  majority  in  some  cases  taking  one  side  of 
the  controversy,  in  other  cases  the  other. 

In  Egypt  the  prevailing  sentiment  accorded  with  the  Monophysite 
opinion,  but  a  small  portion  of  the  Coptic  church  conformed  to  the 
orthodox  Greek  faith,  accepting  the  decisions  of  the  Council  of  Chal- 
cedon, and  thus  allying  themselves  with  the  royal  party.  The  Mar- 
onites  were  long  known  in  the  Levant  as  Mardaites,  or  Rebels,  while 
this  orthodox  party  were  reproached  as  Melkites,  "Royalists',"  or 
"  Hnperialists,"  from  "  me/e^,"  a  king.  Being  a  feeble  community 
they  have  been  greatly  detested  by  the  Copts  of  the  national  church, 
and  when  the  Arabs  invaded  Egypt,  the  Copts  being  inclined  to  es- 
pouse the  cause  of  the  conquerors ;  both  Copts  and  Arabs  naturally 
treated  the  Greek  Royalists  with  great  severity.  Nevertheless  this 
persecuted  and  despised  people  have  maintained  their  existence,  and 
though  few,  and  with  little  influence,  are  under  a  Patriarch  of  Alex- 
andria  and  four  bishops ;  and  they  have  throughlUr  these  ages,  for 
fourteen  hundred  years,  retained  the  same  Peshitto  Syriac  version  of 
the  Scriptures  which  was  accepted  by  the  ancient  Syrian  churches, 
and  has  come  down  to  us  through  so  many  separate  channels. 

But  there  was  yet  another  most  important  though  unexplored 
source  of  information  concerning  Syrian  Translations  and  Literature. 

VI.  THE  MONASTERIES  OP  THE  NITRIAN  DESERT. 

About  eighty  miles  north-west  of  Cairo  lies  Wady  Natro6n,  or 
the  Nitrian  Valley,  so  called  from  certain  salt  lakes  or  ponds,  some 
of  which  yield  natron  and  others  common  salt.     It  is  a  gloomy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXIV  INTKODirCTION   TO   THE    SYRIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

desolate,  and  barren  region,  some  twenty-two  miles  long,  and  from 
two  to  five  and  a  half  miles  wide.  To  this  valley,  known  to  tl^Q  early 
Christians  as  the  desert  of  Scete^  ^bout  the  middle  of  the  second 
century,  one  Fronto  retired  with  seventy  brethren  to  live  an  ascetic 
life,  "  far  from  the  madding  crowd,"  and  away  from  the  temptations 
which  assailed  the  dwellers  of  the  outer  world.  Forgetful  perhaps 
of  the  fact  that  when  the  Saviour  was  to  be  tempted  of  the  devil.  He 
was  driven  into  the  wilderness ;  and  perhaps  wearied  of  the  persecu- 
tions that  assailed  the  infant  church ;  many  Christians  sought  to  find 
in  solitude  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  Christian  virtues  and  a 
religious  life.  He^e,  at  a  later  date,  the  celebrated  Macarius  institu- 
ted a  monastic  establishment,  Ruffinus,  in  a.  d.  372,  visiting  the  re- 
gion, mentioned  fifty  convents  in  the  valley ;  and  another  writer  fif- 
teen years  later,  after  spending  twelve  months  there,  reckoned  that 
the  valley  contained  five  thousand  devotees ;  and  at  the  beginning 
of  the  seventh  century  there  were  said  to  be  about  three  thousand 
five  hundred.  Some  of  these  recluses  were  men  of  high  station  and 
great  refinement,  persons  who  had  been  associated  with  emperors 
and  princes;  who,  though  leaving  the  world  and  its  mad  ambi- 
tions, did  not  abandon  the  literary  pursuits  which  made  their  lonely 
life  tolerable.  In  some  of  their  cells  might  have  been  found  not  only 
prayer-books  and  Bibles,  but  copies  of  the  Iliad,  the  Organon  of 
Arist<>tle,  or  the  Elements  of  Euclid.  Every  convent  had  its  library, 
and  contributions  of  books  from  friends  were  gratefully  received. 

The  Syrian  convent  of  St.  Mary  Deipara  was  specially  fortunate 
in  receiving  contributions  of  manuscripts  from  different  sources. 
Moses  of  Nisibin,  who  entered  the  convent  a.  d.  907,  was  advanced 
to  the  position  of  Abbot,  and  went  to  Bagdad  in  927  to  procure  from 
the  Caliph  a  remission  of  the  poll  tax  demanded  from  the  monks. 
After  attaining  this  end,  he  journeyed  through  Mesopotamia  and 
Syria,  and  returned  in  932  bringing  two  hundred  and  fifty  volumes 
which  he  had  gathered  by  purchase  or  gift  in  the  course  of  his  jour- 
ney. The  records  indicate  that  the  library  of  this  convent  was  often 
neglected,  and  again  examined  and  renovated ;  until  in  the  fifteenth 
century  the  monastery  was  almost  deserted,  being  tenanted  at  one 
time  by  a  solitary  monk,  where  seventy  had  formerly  dwelt. 

At  different  times  travelers  in  Egypt  reported  in  Europe  that 
there  existed  in  those  convents  large  quantities  of  manuscripts.  Ell- 
as Assemani,  who  went  thither  from  Rome  in  1707,  found  the  libra- 
ry full  of  Arabic,  Syriac,  and  QoptiQ  manuscripts,  of  which  he  could 
only  buy  thirty-four  volumes,  and  these  he  came  near  losing,  as  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    SYRIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT.  XXV 

squall  upset  his  cargo  in  the  Nile ;  he  was,  however,  able  to  recover 
liis  manuscripts,  and  place  them  in  the  library  of  the  Vatican.  His 
famous  cousin,  Joseph  Simon  Assemani,  went  to  Egypt  in  1715,  and 
found  in  this  convent  about  two  hundred  Syriac  manuscripts ;  only  a 
few  of  which  he  was  able  to  purchase  privately  from  the  Superior. 
In  1730  the  Sieur  Granger  visited  the  monastery,  was  kindly  received 
by  the  monks,  but  was  not  allowed  to  see  their  books.  He  told  them 
that  the  price  of  their  books  would  restore  their  decaying  churches 
and  mouldering  cells :  they  answered  that  they  had  rather  be  buried 
in  the  ruins  than  part  with  their  manuscripts. 

In  1828  Lord  Prudhoe  visited  the  monastery.  He  made  the  monks 
some  presents  and  was  courteously  treated.  He  found  the  books  of 
the  library  in  a  little  room  under  a  trap  door,  where  it  seemed  that 
the  whole  library  had  been  thrown  down  for  security  and  had  re- 
mained in  the  dust  for  ages,  perhaps  since  the  beginning  of  the 
ninth  century,  when  the  Mohammedans  invaded  the  valley,  plundered 
the  monasteries,  burned  the  manuscripts,  and  enslaved  many  of  the 
monks.  He  obtained  a  few  manuscripts,  which  were  given  to  Arch- 
deacon Tattam,  who  was  engaged  in  gathering  materials  for  a  Cop- 
tic dictionary.  In  March,  1837,  Hon.  R.  Curzon,  afterwards  Lord  de 
la  Zouche,  visited  the  monastery,  and  succeeded  in  so  mollifying  the 
ecclesiastics,  that  he  was  taken  down  into  an  old  oil  vault,  where  he 
discovered  a  narrow,  low  door.  Pushing  it  open  he  entered  into  a 
cell  roofed  and  vaulted  with  stone,  which  was  filled  two  feet  deep 
with  loose  leaves  of  Syriac  manuscripts.  He  obtained  a  few  of  them. 
Mr.  Tattam  afterwards  visited  the  monastery,  and  purchased  some 
volumes  of  the  Pentateuch  and  other  manuscripts.  Again  in  1842  he 
succeeded  in  obtaining  more.  In  1844  Tischendorf  gleaned  some 
leaves  from  the  floor  of  the  library,  and  in  1845  M.  Auguste  Pacho,a 
native  of  Egypt,  lived  six  months  in  the  convent,  and  succeeded  in 
purchasing  the  bulk  of  the  remaining  manuscripts,  most  of  which 
are  now  in  the  British  Museum,  the  printed  catalogue  of  these 
later  acquisitions  by  the  late  Prof.  Wm.  Wright,  of  Cambridge, 
filling  three  quarto  volumes,  in  addition  to  about  seventy-eight 
manuscripts  which  were  in  the  Museum  and  were  catalogued  in  1838. 

There  are  therefore  about  a  thousand  Syriac  manuscripts  in  the 
British  Museum,  besides  others  in  Rome,  Paris,  Berlin,  St.  Petersburg, 
Boston,  New  York,  etc.  Among  them  are  parts  of  the  Syriac  Bible  in 
several  versions,  various  apocryphal  books,  church  service  books, 
psalters,  lectionaries ;  the  writings  of  the  Apostolic  Fathers,  the  wri- 
tings of  Eusebius,  and  a  mass  of  Syrian  literature  which  awaits  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXVI  INTBODUCTIOJf   TO   THE    SYRIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT. 

tardy  labors   of  the  investigator,  the  student,  and  the  translator. 

The  great  library  of  Alexandria,  with  its  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
volumes,  was  utterly  destroyed  long  ago  by  fanatical  conquerors, 
but  away  in  the  Nitrian  desert,  too  poor  and  too  obscure  to  at- 
tract much  attention,  these  lonely  ascetics  guarded  their  treas- 
ured manuscripts ;  and  though  in  faith  and  practice  they  had  gone 
far  from  the  purity  of  the  Gospel  of  Christ,  and  under  oppression 
had  become  ignorant  and  were  unable  to  read  many  of  the  wri- 
tings which  they  possessed,  yet  they  preserved  them  through  the 
ages,  until  in  later  days  others  were  found  better  able  to  appreciate 
their  value,  and  place  them  in  a  position  where  they  would  be  more 
secure  and  more  useful  to  mankind. 

Thus  besides  various  fragmentary  ancient  versions  of  portions 
of  the  New  Testament  in  Syriac,  we  have  received  through  many 
different  and  independent  channels,  one  distinct  and  very  ancient 
Syriac  version  of  the  Scriptures,  the  Peshitto,  which  is  universally 
accepted  and  authenticated,  as  coming  down  from  the  earliest  ages 
of  the  church ;  which  has  been  equally  dear  to  sects  which  have  been 
separated,  since  a.  d.  426,  or  over  1400  years,  not  only  by  distance  but  by 
doctrinal  diversities,  and  which  have  had  almost  nothing  in  common, 
except  this  common  heritage,  this  living  Word  of  God.  Thus  Ma- 
ronites  and  Melkites,  Jacobites  and  Nestorians ;  Chaldean  Christians 
in  Mesopotamia,  and  monks  in  the  Nitrian  desert ;  Syrian  Catholics, 
and  churches  of  St.  Thomas  in  Malabar;  in  whatever  respects  they 
may  differ,  have  united  in  accepting,  preserving,  and  transmitting 
the  Peshitto  Syriac  version  of  the  Apostolic  Records  of  the  life  and 
ministry  of  Him  who  was  the  true  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  the  Sav- 
iour of  the  world.  Whether  upon  the  plains  of  Syria,  in  the  wild 
mountains  of  Kurdistan,  along  the  banks  of  the  Tigris  and  the  Eu- 
phrates, upon  the  mountain  terraces  of  Lebanon,  on  the  coast  of 
Malabar,  among  the  lofty  fastnesses  of  Travancore,  amid  the  cloist- 
ers and  tombs  of  the  Nitrian  desert,  or  among  the  churches  of  the 
Melkites  in  Egypt  and  Arabia ;  through  all  these  regions,  and  among 
all  these  people  of  varying  beliefs,  this  one  version  of  the  sacred 
Scriptures  has  been  universally  received  and  accepted,  and  handed 
down  from  age  to  age.  And  its  possession  by  us  to-day  shows  how 
easy  it  has  been  for  the  hand  of  Providence  to  preserve  those  sacred 
records  to  the  church,  notwithstanding  all  the  corruptions  which 
might  invade  any  one  age  or  land ;  and  shows  furthermore  how  vain 
and  empty  is  the  boast  or  the  claim  of  any  sect  or  community,  to 
have  been  the  exclusive  custodians  of  the  sacred  Scriptures.     And 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SYRIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT.     XXVU 

as  an  illustration  of  the  way  in  which  Grod  causes  the  wrath  of  man 
to  praise  Him,  we  may  see  in  the  presence  of  these  differing  and 
contending  sects  and  parties,  an  additional  safeguard,  which  has  ren- 
dered the  corruption  and  alteration  of  these  records  an  impossibility, 
and  inspires  the  utmost  confidence  in  their  substantial  accuracy. 

THE  AGE  OF  THIS  VERSION. 

The  exact  age  of  the  Peshitto  Syriac  version  is  unknown.  It  is 
so  old  that  no  one  knows  how  old  it  is  ;  the  churches  that  use  it  do 
not  know  when  they  began  to  use  it ;  the  only  tradition  they  have 
concerning  it  is,  that  it  dates  back  to  the  beginnings  of  the  Syrian 
Churches.  Others  dispute  this  claim  to  high  antiquity,  and  it  seems 
proper  to  present  such  facts  and  considerations  as  may  shed  light 
upon  the  subject. 

Undoubtedly  it  was  the  divine  purpose  to  bring  the  Oracles  of  God 
within  the  reach  of  the  common  people,  so  that  from  childhood,  like 
Timothy,  they  might  know  the  Holy  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to 
make  us  wise  unto  salvation. 

In  accordance  with  this  purpose  the  sacred  books  were  written' 
in  the  simplest  language  that  the  world  knew.  Not  in  the  Egyptian 
hieroglyphics,  which  have  stood  on  tombs  and  temples  unread  from 
age  to  age, — no  living  man  for  centuries  having  been  able  to  deci- 
pher them  until  modern  research  has  unravelled  their  mysteries; 
not  in  the  seven  or  eight  hundred  different  cuneiform  characters, 
in  which  the  literature  of  Assyria,  Babylon,  and  Persia,  has  been 
locked  and  buried  and  forgotten  for  many  centuries ;  not  in  the  537 
letters  of  the  Hindoo  alphabet,  or  in  the  247  characters  of  the 
Tamil  tongue;  not  in  the  208  letters  of  the  Abyssinian  language; 
not  in  the  43,960  different  characters  which  have  sealed  up  the 
thoughts  of  the  Chinese  sages,  rendering  it  impossible  for  ordinary 
persons  to  have  a  competent  acquaintance  with  the  literature  of  that 
land ;  but  in  the  twenty-two  letters  of  the  Hebrew  alphabet,  which 
a  child  might  learn  in  an  hour,  and  some  of  which,  in  their  ancient 
forms,  as  inscribed  upon  the  Moabite  stone,  would  be  recognized 
to-day  by  any  school  child  as  identical  with  letters  of  our  own  al- 
phabet; and  which  in  their  simplicity  have  held  their  place  unin- 
terruptedly in  the  minds  and  memories  of  successive  generations, 
never  having  been  lost  or  forgotten  for  a  day,  though  the  more 
complicated  alphabets  and  hieroglyphics  of  other  tongues  have  been 
buried  for  ages  in  oblivion. 

The  Mosaic  law  required  that  each  Israelite  should  wear  upon  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXviii  INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    SYRIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

person  and  inscribe  upon  the  posts  of  his  dwelling  certain  portions 
of  the  Hebrew  Scriptures.  The  tendency  of  this  requirement  was 
to  banish  illiteracy  from  the  Israelitish  nation,  and  to  make  them  a 
reading  people ;  and  the  simplicity  of  their  alphabet  and  their  lan- 
guage has  made  them  a  reading  people,  and  fitted  them  to  take  rank 
among  the  foremost  of  the  nations  in  their  qualifications  for  the  pur- 
suit of  knowledge. 

When  in  the  long  captivity  in  Babylon  the  Hebrew  tongue  had 
been  in  part  forgotten,  and  the  Chaldean  language  had  partially  sup. 
planted  it  in  the  minds  of  the  common  people,  Ezra,  "  a  scribe  well 
instructed  in  the  law,"  with  his  associates,  were  accustomed  to  read 
in  the  book  of  the  law,  and  give  the  sense  distinctly,  so  that  the  peo- 
ple could  understand  the  message  which  was  given  to  them  of  God. 
The  Jewish  historian,  Josephus,  informs  us  that  when  the  books  of 
the  Mosaic  law  were  desired  for  the  use  of  the  great  Alexandrian 
library,  they  were  promptly  translated  into  the  Greek  tongue;*  and 
the  entire  Jewish  Scriptures  were  subsequently  translated  into  that 
language,  for  the  use  of  such  Jews  as  were  more  familiar  with  the 
Greek  tongue  than  with  the  language  of  their  forefathers. 

The  superstition  which  makes  the  devout  Mohammedan  unwilling 
to  translate  the  Koran  into  any  other  tongue,  or  which  leads  men  to 
utter  their  prayers  and  teachings  in  a  language  not  comprehended 
by  the  people,  had  no  place  in  the  early  church  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ.  At  the  first  dawning  of  the  Gospel  day,  the  Holy  Spirit 
took  care  that  the  devout  men  from  every  nation,  dwelling  at  Jeru- 
salem should  each  hear  in  their  own  tongue  wherein  they  were  born, 
the  wonderful  works  of  God ;  and  the  gift  of  tongues  bestowed  for 
this  purpose  was  a  most  serviceable  instrumentality  of  the  early  church. 
But  as  in  the  primitive  church  he  who  spake  with  tongues  was  required 
to  keep  silence  unless  there  was  present  someone  who  could  interpret ; 
and  as  the  apostle  declared  that  he  would  rather  speak  ^ye  words 
witlr'  the  understanding  than  ten  thousand  words  in  an  unknown 
tongue,  we  may  naturally  conclude  that  early  provision  would  be 
made  for  the  translation  of  the  apostolic  records  into  the  tongues  of 
the  different  nations,  who,  though  sometime  afar  off,  had  now  been 
brought  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ. 

A  spectacular  religion,  consisting  largely  of  forms  and  ceremonies, 
robes  and  rituals,  signs  and  symbols,  might  be  modified,  corrupted, 
suppressed  by  persecution,  and  speedily  forgotten  ;  for  the  passing  of 
a  single  generation  might  efface  the  memory  of  its  forms  and  symbols  : 

•JewUh  AntiquUtes,  Preface  §  IV. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTBODUCTION   TO    THE    SYRIAC    NEW   TESTAMENT.  XXIX 

but  a  religion  of  established  facts,  of  written  documents,  verified 
testimonies,  and  authentic  manuscripts ;  a  religion  resting  upon  di- 
vine ideas  and  inspired  records,  cannot  be  easily  extirpated  or  cor- 
rupted. So  long  as  a  single  copy  of  the  record  remains  hidden  in 
some  cave  or  cell,  so  long  there  is  a  possibility  of  investigating  and 
restoring  the  forgotten  faith  by  reference  to  these  original  docu- 
ments. Hence  while  the  religions  and  superstitions  which  were  em- 
bedded in  symbols  and  ceremonies,  recorded  in  cumbrous  characters 
and  obscure  hieroglyphics,  or  handed  down  by  oral  tradition,  have 
perished  and  been  forgotten,  the  religion  of  the  Bible,  the  Gospel  of 
the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  based  upon  authentic  and  unimpeachable  rec- 
ords and  documents,  has  held  its  onward  course  from  age  to  age,  and 
still  maintains  its  existence,  firmly  rooted  in  the  records,  the  litera- 
ture, the  experience,  and  the  recollections  of  the  followers  of  the 
Lord  Jesus. 

The  propriety  and  importance  of  giving  the  Scriptures  to  the  com- 
mon people  in  their  own  vernacular  need  not  be  argued.  The  He- 
brews from  the  beginning  had  their  Scriptures  in  the  Hebrew  tongue, 
which  was  afterwards  interpreted  and  paraphrased  when  they  had 
partly  lost  the  knowledge  of  their  native  language.  When  the  He- 
brew and  Chaldee  language  became  mingled  in  the  seventy  years' 
captivity,  Daniel  wrote  his  book  in  both  Hebrew  and  Chaldee. 
When  in  later  years  the  Greek  tongue  predominated  as  a  universal 
language,  the  Hebrew  records  were  translated  into  that  tongue,  and 
used  by  the  Jews,  the  apostles,  and  the  Saviour  himself.  _  When  the 
Syrian  p.hTjf'n.hps  wcrc  established,  the  Scriptures  were  given  to  them 
in  their  own  vernacular  j.an^'wliere  at  an  "early'date  tTieXatin  elelment 
in  the  church  became  specially  strong,  the  same  books  were  transla- 
ted into  the  Latin  tongue  for  the  benefit  of  people  who  understood 
that  langu^e.  And  from  that  day  to  this,  the  work  of  translating 
has  gone  on.  Alphabets  have  been  invented,  languages  have  been 
learned  and  written  down,  and  literature  has  been  created,  that  the 
Word   of  God   might  reach  the  eyes  and  ears   of  waiting  nations. 

We  know  that  in  the  time  of  our  Saviour  the  Hebrew  Scriptures 
were  read  in  the  countless  synagogues  of  the  Jews  every  sabbath 
day.  Luke  iv.  16-20 ;  Acts  xv.  21.  We  also  know  that  before  the 
year  a.  d.  65,  when  Paul  died,  he  wrote  many  letters,  which  the 
apostle  Peter  ranks  among  "  the  other  scriptures  "  (2  Peter  iii.  16), 
and  some  of  which  Paul  solemnly  charged  them  were  to  "  be  read  to 
all  the  holy  brethren ;"  and  he  also  directed  different  churches  to 
exchange  with  each  other  the  epistles  they  had  received  from  him. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXX      INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  SYBIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

1  Thess.  V.  27 ;  Col.  iv.  16.  We  know  from  Justin  Martyr's  first 
Apoloi^y,  addressed  to  the  Roman  Emperor  (c.  Ixvii.),  that  it  was 
customary  among  the  primitive  Christians  in  their  public  assemblies, 
about  A.  D.  140,  to  publicly  read  from  the  Jewish  and  Christian  scrip- 
tures ;  for  Justin  says,  "  The  memorabilia  of  the  apostles,  or  the 
writings  of  the  prophets,  are  read  as  long  as  time  permits."  From 
Tertullian,  in  his  Prescription  Against  Heresies  (c.  xxxvi.),  we  learn 
that  about  a.  d.  200,  the  "  authentic  letters  "  of  the  apostles  still  ex- 
isted, and  were  recited  in  the  different  churches  to  which  they  were 
addressed ;  and  to  the  examination  of  those  writings  Tertullian  di- 
rects the  attention  of  honest  enquirers,  mentioning  the  different 
cities  where  they  could  be  found,  namely,  Corinth,  Philippi,  Thessa- 
lonica,  Ephesus,  and  Rome. 

T^Svria  was  a  land  of  many  peoples  andjnany  tongues.  The  seven 
D_ations,  the  original  inhabitants,  were  never  jgaljrely  expeHed. ;  some 
of  tiie  Hittites,  i^listmes',  Moabites,  and  Ammonites,  lingered  upon 
their  borders ;  the  Assyrian  conquerors  had  removed  the  ten  tribes 
and  replanted  the  territory  with  people  of  other  nationalities  brought 
from  distant  regions;  the  Jews  had  been  carried  to  Babylon,  re- 
maining there  till  they  had  lost  the  purity  of  their  native  speech ; 
the  Greek  and  Roman  conquests  had  left  their  mark  upon  the  land ; 
the  "  twelve  tribes  of  Israel  scattered  abroad,"  some  of  whom  had 
been  dispersed  since  the  days  of  Shalmaneser,  would  naturally  learn 
the  language  of  the  nations  where  they  dwelt ;  and  the  proselytes 
who  came  from  all  lands  to  worship  in  that  temple  which  was  "  a 
house  of  prayer  for  all  nations,"  would  use  the  various  tongues  with 
which  they  were  acquainted. 

The  polyglot  character  of  the  population  of  Palestine  may  be  in- 
ferred from  the  inscription  on  the  Saviour's  cross,  which  was  in  He- 
brew, in  Greek  and  in  Latin ;  Latin  being  the  tongue  of  the  conquer- 
ors, and  rulei-s,  the  official  tongue  of  the  Roman  empire ;  Greek,  the 
literary  language  of  the  world,  with  which  multitudes  of  the  Jews 
in  Egypt  and  elsewhere  had  become  familiar,  and  which  had  special 
interest  for  them  from  the  fact  that  the  Greek  translation  of  the 
Hebrew  Scriptures  was  in  common  use  and  was  frequently  quoted ; 
Hebrew,  the  sacred  language  of  the  Jews,  in  which  their  Scriptures 
were  read  in  the  synagogues  every  sabbath  day;  the  language  in 
which  the  Jewish  rabbis  were  instructed,  and  of  which  every  Israel- 
ite  must  have  some  knowledge: — these  and  various  other  tongues 
were  spoken  in  Syria  by  those  who  were  bom  upon  the  soil,  or  whom 
the  love  of  travel,  the  fortunes  of  war,  or  the  pursuits  of  commerce 
brought  thither. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  8YBIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT.      XXXI 

But  besides  the  great  leading  langu^es  we  have  mentioned, 
there  was  the  Syrian  dialect  of  the  Hebrew,  the  language  of  the 
market,  the  nsning-Doat,  tHe  liome,  the  fireside,  the  farm,  and  the 
common  people;  and  however  learned  the  dwellers  in  Palestine 
might  be  in  Greek,  or  however  reverential  they  might  be  toward  the 
Hebrew,  yet  in  their  familiar  conversation  they  would  naturally  use 
the  Syrian  speech.  As  we  are  expressly  told  that  "  the  common 
people  heard  Him  gladly,"  it  is  believed  by  many  that  a  ponsiderable 
portion  of  the  language  spoken  by  our  Saviour  was  Syriac.  Doubt- 
less  He  also  spokemTTreek,  and  the  Gospels  probably  sometimes 
record  what  He  said  in  one  language,  translating  it  into  another  for 
the  benefit  of  readers  familiar  with  the  Grecian  tongue.  The  accu- 
rate statements  of  the  apostolic  eye-witnesses,  who  were  careful  to 
note  the  gesture,  the  look,  or  the  emphasis  used  by  the  Saviour,  tell- 
ing us  how  He  "  looked  round  "  upon  the  people ;  how  He  "  stretched 
forth  His  hand,"  how  he  "  cried  with  a  loud  voice,"  how  He  "  sat " 
on  the  mountain  when  he  taught,  or  in  the  fishing  boat,  or  by  Ja- 
cob's well, — in  certain  cases  give  us  the  exact  words  He  used  in  the 
Syrian  tongue^  following  them  with  a  translation  into  the  Greek. 
Hence  we  find  that  in  our  Saviour's  teaching  and  wonder-working 
He  used  the  Syrian  language  as  if  He  were  perfectly  familiar  with  it. 
He  opened  the  lips  of  the  dumb  with  a  Syrian  word,  "  Ephphatha." 
He  waked  the  ruler's  daughter  from  her  death  sleep  with  the  Syriac 
call,  "  Talitha  cumi."  He  gave  to  one  of  His  disciples  the  Syriac 
name  "  Cephas."  He  taught  His  followers  that  they  could  not  serve 
God  and  "  Mammon,"  which  was  the  Syrian  word  for  wealth.  He 
rebuked  the  Jews  for  accepting  the  service  which  children  owed  to ' 
their  parents,  and  thus  robbing  them  of  their  rights,  by  the  use  of  the 
Syriac  word  "corban."  He  warned  His  disciples  against  applying 
to  a  brother  the  contemptuous  Syrian  word  "  raca."  In  the  garden 
he  addressed  his  Father  by  the  Syrian  word  "  Abba."  When  in  his 
last  agony  on  the  cross.  He  spoke  the  Syrian  words,  "  Eli,  Eli,  lama 
sabachthani. "  His  early  church  had  as  their  watch- word  the  Syrian 
words  "Maran  atha,"  "the  Lord  cometh;"  and  Luke  tells  us  of  an 
early  disciple  raised  from  the  dead  whose  Syrian  name  was  "Tabi- 
tha."  All  such  facts  as  these  indicate  that  a  very  considerable 
portion  of  our  Saviour's  words  were  probably  uttered  in  the  Syr- 
ian tongue.  If  this  be  so,  much  which  is  recorded  as  having  been 
spoken  by  our  Saviour,  must  have  been  a  translation  into  one  lan- 
guage, of  what  was  spoken  in  another.  Hence  the  Syrian  gospels 
have  a  special  value ;  for  whether  they  are  to  be  regarded  as  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


> 


XXxii  INTRODUCTION    TO    THE    8YBIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT. 

record  of  the  thoughts  which  the  Saviour  spoke  in  the  very  language 
in  which  He  uttered  them,  or  whether  they  a  re  to  be  regarded  as  an 
early  translation  from  Greek  originals  hack  into  the  speech  and  idi- 
om in  which  they  were  originally  expressed,  we  may  quite  agree 
with  Dr.  Malan  in  saying,  "  We  must  look  for  the  real  spirit  of  our 
Saviour's  teaching  in  the  venerable  idiom  of  the  Peshitto." 

As  the  church  of  Christ  had  its  origin  in  Syria,  and  as  its  earliest 
members  were  mostly  Syrians, — the  Jews  themselves  springing  from 
"  a  Syrian  ready  to  perish  "  (Deut.  xxvi.  5),  and  the  inhabitants  of 
Palestine  being  largely  of  the  same  race  and  tongue;  therefore  in 
view  of  these  facts,  and  in  view  of  the   literary  standing  of  the  Syr- 

^ian  people  in  the  Augustan  Age  of  Rome,  and  with  the  knnwlpfl^p 
that  it  was  the  will  of  God  that  men  should  hear  in  their  own  tongue 
the  story  of  His  wonderful  works,  even  though  miracles  were  requi- 
site to  accomplish  it,  it  can  hardly  be  believed  that  for  any  great 
length  of  time  this  people  would  be  left  destit  ute  of  those  written 
records  of  the  New  Covenant  which  form  the  sure  basis  of  the  faith 
of  the  church  of  the  living  God. 

The  Hebrew,  the  Syriac  and  the  Arabic  have  been  called  the  three 
great  literary  alphabets  of  the  East,_and  through  this  Syriac  alpha- 
bet and  tongue  were  poured  the  living  tides  of  divine  thought  which 
quickened  the  nations  for  generations ;  until  in  the  seventh  century, 
the  invasion  of  the  False  Prophet,  a.  d.  630,  and  the  conquest  of 
Syria  by  Abu  Obej^h  and  Khaled  a.  d.  622-638,  almost  blotted  '^ 
out  the  Syrian  tongue  and  the  Syrian  civilization,  and  made  the  land 
and  the  cities  of  Syria  a  desolation  which  remains  to  this  time. 

Travelers  in  the  East  meet  to-day  with  city  after  city  whose  build- 
ings date  from  the  first  to  the  seventh  century,  standing  apparently 
as  they  were  when  abandoned  twelve  hundred  years  ago,  affording 
us  a  view  of  their  splendid  houses  with  galleries  and  balconies,  beau- 
tiful gardens,  magnificent  churches,  adorned  with  columns,  flanked 
with  towers,  and  surrounded  with  splendid  tombs ;  cities  which 
are  thus  described  in  a  single  sentence  of  a  Traveller's  Hand-Book : 
"  Selucia  is  deserted,  Apamea  is  deserted,  Arethusa  is  deserted,  Lar- 
issa  is  deserted,  Laodicea  ad  Libanum  is  deserted,  and  ^ntioch  has 
dwindled  down  to  a  town  of  six  thousand  inhabitants."     But  every 

"6be"orthese^75tties'  ^^^  "fSpresent^a  by  aiSlshop  in  tTie^icene  Coun- 
cil, and  the  list  of  their  names  still  exists  in  the  Syrian  language. 

We  know  that  large  and  influential  churches  arose  in  Syria  under 
the  labors  of  the  apostles  and  their  associates  and  successors;  we 
know  that  "the  disciples  were  first  called  Christians  at  Antioch  "  in 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTEODUCTION   TO   THE    SYEIAC    NEW    TESTAMENT.  XXXIU 

Syria ;  and  as  the  language  which  the  Syrians  used  was  much  the 
same  as  that  used  by  our  Saviour ;  it  would  be  exceedingly  reasonable 
to  suppose  that  those  early  churches  would  have  some  record  of  the 
"  gracious  words  that  proceeded  out  of  His  mouth."  A  curious  fact 
which  has  come  down  to  us,  indicates  the  widespread  knowledge  and 
early  use  of  the  sacred  writings  among  the  Syrians. 

About  the  year  a.  d.  175  an  Assyrian  philosopher  named  Tatian, 
having  embraced  Christianity,  came  into  Syria,  and  there  having 
accepted  certain  opinions  of  the  Qnostics,  became  in  some  sense 
a  leader  in  one  of  the  ancient  sects  which  arose.  He  prepared,  in 
the  Syrian  language,  a  work  called  DicUessaron^  or  "  through  four," 
which  was  a  sort  of  digest  or  Harmony  of  the  four  Gospels  in  one 
continuous  narrative.  It  is  not  probable  that  he  translated  the  work 
from  the  Greek ;  if  he  did  not,  then  it  would  appear  that  the  four 
Gospels  were  already  extant  in  the  Syrian  tongue.  From  this  Har- 
mony Tatian  omitted  certain  portions  which  did  not  agree  with 
his  peculiar  views,  and  possibly  altered  certain  passages  for  the 
same  reason.  The  book,  often  mentioned  by  early  writers,  has  been 
lost ;  though  fragments  are  preserved  in  a  Commentary  thereon  by 
Ephrem  the  Syrian  still  extant  in  an  Armenian  version,  which  has 
been  lately  translated  into  Latin ;  also  in  citations  by  Bar-Hebraeus, 
and  other  Syrian  writers.  An  alleged  Arabic  translation  of  the 
Diatesaaroriy  published  in  Rome  by  Ciasca,  has  recently  been  trans- 
lated into  English ;  and  though  the  integrity  of  the  text  is  ques- 
tioned, it  may  yet  give  us  a  fair  idea  of  a  work  which  was  once 
widely  circulated  through  the  regions  where  the  Syriac  tongue  was 
spoken,  and  the  Syriac  scriptures  were  readyW'heodoret,  who  became  \ 
bishop  of  Cyrrhus,  capital  ofjhe  Syrian  province,  Cyrrhestica,  about  \  * 
A.  D.  420,  dying  there  about  a7d.  4o7  ;— a  pi  bliBc  commentator,  histo-  \ 
rian,  and  controversalist,  four  folio  volumes  of  whose  writings  have  * 
come  down  to  us ; — when  visiting  the  numerous  churches  under  his 
care,  found  more  than  two  hundred  copies  of  Tatian's  Diatessaron 
in  the  Syriac  speaking  churches  in  his  own  diocese.  In  his  "  Epitome 
of  Heretical  EviUFaUing^^'*  I.  20,  printed  in  the  fourth  volume  of 
his  Works,  p.  312,  Theodoret  says  of  Tatian,  "  This  one  composed 
the  so  called  Diatessaron  Gospely  cutting  out  the  genealogies,  and 
whatever  other  matters  show  that  the  Lord  was  sprung  from  the  seed 
of  David  according  to  the  flesh.  And  this  not  only  of  his  own  party 
used,  but  also  those  who  follow  the  teachings  of  the  apostles,  not 
knowing  the  pemiciousness  of  the  compilation,  but  using  it  quite 
simply,  as  a  compendious  book.    And  I  too  found  more  than  two 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXXIV    INTBODUCTION  TO  THE  8YBIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

hundred  9uch  hooka  held  in  esteem  in  the  churcJiea  near  w«,  and  I 
gathered  and  put  them  all  away,  and  introduced  in  their  stead  those 
four  evangelists,^'** 

This  fact  gives  us  some  idea  of  the  wide  circulation  of  the  Scrip- 
tures in  the  Syrian  tongue,  and  indicates  how  indispensable  an  early. 
Syrian  version  must  have  been.  Of  course  the  nuclei  of  the  first 
churches  were  usually  Jews,  for  the  Gospel  came  "  to  the  Jew  first." 
Wherever  the  apostles  went  they  preached  the  Gospel  in  the  Jewish 
synagogues,  and  wherever  Jews  accepted  it,  Christian  worship  would 
naturally  succeed  the  observances  of  the  Jewish  religion  in  which 
they  had  been  trained.  But  in  the  synagogue  worship  the  public 
reading  of  the  Scriptures  was  indispensable ;  and  as  the  Hebrew 
Scriptures  formed  the  foundation  of  the  Christian  faith,  nothing 
would  be  more  natural  than  that  the  worship  of  the  hew  converts 
should  begin  with  the  reading  of  the  writings  of  the  prophets  and 
the  apostles,  with  exhortation,  oxv^l  instruction ;  as  was  actually  the 
case ;  the  apostle  Paul  writing  to  Timothy,  "  Till  I  come,  give  heed 
to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching."  1  Tim.  iv.  13.  And  while 
the  Hebrew  Old  Testament  and  the  Gospel  of  Matthew  in  Hebrew 
would  be  available  for  reading  to  those  who  knew  that  language,  and 
the  Septuagint  translation  of  the  Old  Testament,  and  the  Greek  Gos- 
pels and  epistles,  would  meet  the  wants  of  the  Gfeek-speaking  peo- 
ple ;  it  would  then  be  most  natural  for  the  Gospels  and  epistles  to  be 
translated  one  by  one  into  the  different  languages  of  the  people  who 
required  them.  Parts  of  the  work  would  thus  be  very  likely  to  be 
done  by  different  persons,  and  a  final  revision  of  the  whole  by  com- 
petent hands,  might  in  after  years  result  in  a  version  like  the  Pe- 
shitto,  which  contained  all  the  earlier  New  Testament  writings,  those 
only  being  omitted  which  in  the  earliest  ages  had  not  been  fully  au- 
thenticated and  universally  accepted.  This  fact  does  not  argue 
against  their  authority,  but  only  indicates  their  later  origin,  and  the 
extreme  caution  with  which  the  early  Christians  scrutinized  every 
work  which  was  presented  to  them,  carefully  weeding  out  the  ficti- 
tious and  spurious,  and'  only  accepting,  after  sufficient  investigation, 
those  which  came  to  them  with  the  most  undoubted  credentials  as 
the  work  of  apostles  and  apostolic  men. 

We  must  recollect  the  fact  reported  by  Papias,  Irenaeus,  Pan- 
taenus,  Origen,  Eusebius,  Cyril  of  Jerusalem,  Athanasaius  and  Epiph- 
anius, — the  general  tradition, — that  the  first  Gospel,  by  Mat- 
thew, was  written  in  Hebrew,  or  as  we  may  reasonably  suppose, 
that  dialect  of  Hebrew,  or  Aramaic,  which  was  the  language  of  the 

*  Wettcott'i  Canon  of  th*  New  TettamerU^  p.  S28.    Fifth  £dition. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTBODUCTIUN   TO    THE   SYBIAC   NEW   TESTAMENT.  XXXV 

Syrian  people  at  that  time ;  Pantsenus,  Origen,  Epiphanius,  and 
Jerome,  expressly  declaring  that  Matthew's  Gospel  was  "written 
in  Hebrev)  letters,^'*  *  And  if  this  Gospel  by  Matthew  was  orig- 
inally written  in  Hebrew,  there  would  be  one  portion  of  the  New 
Testament  that  would  hardly  require  a  translation  for  the  use  of  the 
Syrians.  With  some  slight  changes  it  might  be  well  accepted  as 
their  own  book  in  their  own  tongue.  The  other  Gospels  were  writ- 
ten in  the  Greek  language,  and  it  is  concluded  that  Matthew's  Gospel 
was  probably  translated  into  Greek.  This  might  have  been  done 
soon  after  it  was  written  in  Hebrew,  and  it  might  have  been  done 
by  Matthew  himself,  or  under  his  immediate  direction  and  supervis- 
ion ;  so  that  the  book  might  have  been  equally  his,  whether  in  He- 
brew or  in  Greek. 

Eusebius  in  his  Ecclesiastical  History,  (iv.  22),  declares  that 
Hegesippus,  who  lived  about  a.  d.  100 — 175  and  traveled  and  wrote 
in  the  interests  of  Christianity,  "states  some  particulars  from  the 
Gospel  of  the  Hebrews^  and  from  the  SyriaCj  and  particularly  from 
the  Hebrew  language,  showing  that  he  himself  was  a  convert  from 
the  Hebrews." 

Epiphanius  informs  us  that  in  the  time  of  Constantino  a  copy  of 
Matthew  in  Hebrew  was  found  in  a  cell  at  Tiberias ;  and  Jerome  hav- 
ing mentioned  Matthew's  Gospel  in  Hebrew,  says,  "  It  atiU  exists  in 
the  library  of  Pamphilus  at  CaBsarea; "  the  first  Christian  library  ever 
established,  and  from  which  Eusebius  gathered  much  of  the  learned 
lore  exhibited  in  his  erudite  and  voluminous  works. 

The  Hebrew  Gospel  of  Matthew  is  lost,  so  far  as  we  know ;  but  it 
is  probable  that  the  substance  of  it  may  be  embodied  or  represented 
in  the  earliest  Syrian  version  of  that  Gk>spel.  It  is  hardly  possible 
that  this  book  had  utterly  perished  at  the  time  when  the  Peshitto 
translation  was  made ;  and  if  not,  then  it  would  be  most  natural  for 
those  who  were  undertaking  to  furnish  the  Syrian  churches  with 
copies  of  the  New  Testament  writings,  to  make  use  of  the  gospel  by 
Matthew,  which  was  in  substance  already  done  to  their  hand.  Some 
scholars  have  noted  in  the  different  Syriac  versions  of  portions  of 
th«  New  Testament,  the  age  of  which  is  fully  determined,  indications 
of  an  attempt  to  conform  the  later  versions  more  exactly  to  the 
Oreek  copies^  which  were  doubtless  looked  upon  as  the  standard  au- 
thority. If  the  substance  of  Matthew's  Hebrew  Gospel  is  embodied 
IB  the  Syriac  version,  this  would  account  for  the  apparent  disappear- 
ance of  that  €k)spel  in  Hebrew. 

*  Jerome  Script.  Eeel.  86.    Eusebius  Eccl.  Hist,  n,  26.    Epiphanius  1,  2,  1.    Jerome  De 
Viris  mm.  3. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


XXXVl  INTRODUCTION   TO    THE    SYBIAC   NEW    TESTAMENT. 

It  has  therefore  been  concluded  by  some  eminent  and  intelligent 
students  that  the  Peshitto  translation  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament 
was  made  either  by  or  with  the  sanction  of  the  Apostles  themselves, 
or  their  immediate  successors ;  and  the  Peshitto  Syriac  has  been 
held  to  be  the  earliest  translation  of  the  New  Testament  writings 
ever  made.  And  with  this  conclusion  agree  certain  traditions  among 
the  Syrian  churches  of  to-day.  More  recent  investigations,  howev- 
er, leave  the  point  somewhat  uncertain.  The  traditions  referred  to 
do  not  appear  to  be  of  great  antiquity,  and  further,  another  Syriac 
manuscript  has  been  discovered  containing  a  portion  of  the  New 
Testament  in  a  version  which  seems  still  more  ancient  than  the  Pe- 
shitto, and  which  probably  dates  from  the  second  century.  This 
manuscript  is  known  as  the  Curetonian,  it  having  been  discovered  in 
1842  in  the  convent  of  Deipara  in  the  Nitrian  desert,  and  translated 
and  published  in  1858  by  Rev.  William  Cureton,  The  superior  an- 
tiquity of  this  version  however  is  questioned  by  some  critics,  though 
the  manuscript  itself  is  ancient,  being  probably  written  about  a.  d.  450. 

But  if  the  superior  antiquity  of  other  manuscripts  were  fully  es- 
tablished, it  might  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  Peshitto  was  the 
ripe  fruit  of  the  labors  of  successive  translators,  and  that  as  Wycliffe, 
Tyndale,  Cranmer,  Rogens,  Calvin,  and  their  associates  and  success- 
ors, with  others,  prepared  the  way  for,  and  contributed  to  the 
production  of  the  Authorized  Version  of  the  Scriptures  in  English, 
which  no  one  man  could  have  produced,  so  it  is  possible  that  the 
labors  of  other  unknown  translators  prepared  the  way  for  this  most 
excellent  version  of  the  New  Testament  books;  as  a  translation  so 
exjgpiisijtfi .and. beautiful  could  hardly  lie  entirely  Jih.Q  .WOj£  Qf  ^.single. 
^  unpracticed  hand,  but  must  have  been  produced  by  some  scribe  well- 
instructed,  who,  utilizing  the  careful  and  painstaking  labors  of  pre- 
ceding translators,  improved  and  completed  the  work  which  they 
had  begun,  bringing  forth  out  of  the  treasure-house  things  new  and 
old,  and  leaving  to  the  church  this  translation,  to  be  loved  and  read 
and  cherished,  long  after  the  names  of  those  who  performed  the  lov- 
ing labor  were  lost  from  human  knowledge  and  recollection,  never 
to  be  known  until  He  shall  come  whose  reward  is  with  him,  "  to  give 
to  every  man  according  as  his  work  shall  be." 

Perhaps  we  may  safely  adopt  the  conclusion  of  Dr.  B.  F.  Westcott, 
in  his  Survey  of  the  Canon^  p.  238.  "I  think  that  the  various  facts  of 
the  case  are  adequately  explained  by  supposing  that  versions  of  sepa- 
rate books  of  the  New  Testament  were  first  made  and  used  in  Pales- 
tine perhaps  within  the  Apostolic  age,  and  that  shortly  afterwards  they 
were  collected,  revised,  and  completed  at  Edessa." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LNTBODUOTION  TO  TUS  8YBIA0  N£W  TS8TAMSNT.   XXXVU 

It  is  this  venerable  and  valuable  version  of  the  New  Testament,  so 
widely  diffused,  so  long  preserved,  and  so  highly  prized,  which, 
through  the  patient  efforts  and  accurate  scholarship  of  the'  learned 
translator,  is  here  laid  before  the  reader,  in  an  English  dress.  As 
an  independent  witness  to  the  substantial  integrity  of  the  New  Tes- 
tament records,  it  is  of  priceless  value.  As  an  aid  to  determining 
the  exact  reading  of  the  ancient  Qreek  text,  it  is  not  to  be  despised. 
As  an  answer  to  the  question,  where  would  the  Bible  have  been, 
if  it  had  not  been  preserved  and  handed  down  by  some  particular 
church,  sect,  or  denomination,  it  is  ample ;  and  as  a  memorial  of  the 
faith  of  the  eastern  and  primitive  churches,  it  deserves  to  be  held  in 
everlasting  remembrance.* 

On  the  lintel  of  a  disused  and  built-up  door  of  the  Great  Mosque 
at  Damascus,  the  curious  traveler  who  will  scramble  over  the  roofs 
of  the  buildings  which  crowd  against  it,  may  read  a  Greek  inscription 
chiseled  there  when  that  edifice  was  erected  for  Christian  worship  : 
"Thy  Kingdom  O  Chjeust  is  an  evbblastinq  kingdom,  and  thy  do- 
minion BNDUBETH  THBOUGHOUT  ALL  GBNBBATIONS."      And    thoUgh  a 

corrupted  religion  has  long  been  scourged  by  oppressors,  and  though 
from  minaret  and  pulpit  may  sound  the  praise  of  Islam's  prophet ; 
yet  the  inscription  is  true  to-day ;  and  the  living  Word  still  witness- 
es the  truth ;  and  of  those  who  have  "  tasted  the  good  Word  of  God, 
and  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come,"  and  who  secretly  read  those 
sentences  which  have  been  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  there  are  we 
may  hope,  in  those  lands  more  than  seven  thousand  whose  hearts 
still  turn  to  the  living  God,  the  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  and  who 
wait  for  the  blessing  which  can  only  come  from  that  Word  which  is 
a  lamp  to  our  feet,  and  a  light  to  our  path. 


*For  the  Mftterials  f<nr  this  sketch  the  writer  would  ftcknowledf^e  his  indebtedness  to  many 
sources,  among  which  may  be  mentioned  Perldns*  Eight  Years  Residence  in  Persia  ;  Cur- 
xon's  visits  to  Monasteries  in  the  Levant;  Southgate's  Visit  to  the  Syrian  Church  of  Mes- 
ODotamia ;  Smith  and  Dwight's  Researches  in  Armenia ;  Geo.  P.  Bulger's  Ne»torians  and 
their  Rituals ;  Claudius  Buchanan's  Christian  Researches  in  Asia ;  J.  W.  Etheridge's  Syrian 
Churches  and  Four  Gospels  f  Dr.  W.  Wright's  Catalogue  of  Syriac  MSS.  in  the  British 
Museum:  an  article  by  Prof .  JohnGwynn,  D.  D.,  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin,  in  the  Church, 
Quarterly  Review  for  July,  1S88;  articles  by  Canon  W.  J.  Eimonds,  in  the  Bible  Society 
Reporter,  for  Sept.,  1S92  and  onward;  with  various  volumes  of  travel,  Encyclopedias,  etc.; 
also  to  Prof essors  Thaver  and  Toy  of  Harvard  College,  and  Bev.  Benj.  Labaree  of  Urtimiah; 
and  especially  for  the  kindly  suggestions  and  constant  aid  of  Prof.  Isaac  H.  Hall,  formerly  of 
the  College  in  Beyrout,  late  Curator  of  the  Metropolitan  Art  Museum,  Centrah  Park,  New 
York. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


:VUl      INTBODUCTION   TO   THE    SYBL4C    NEW   TESTAMENT. 

'.'^.  M  1^       THE  SINAITIC  SYRIAC  GOSPELS. 

-*a  1858  Dr.  Wm.  Cureton  published  an  edition  of  the  Syriac  Gospels,  with  an  Engli^  ' 
translation,  from  certain  manuscripts  brought  from  the  Monastery  of  St.  Mary  Deipara,  in 
the  valley  of  the  Natron  Lakes  near  £gypt»  in  1842.    This  Syriac  version  differed  from  the 
Peshitto,  and  was  regarded  as  more  ancient,  though  less  accurate  and  complete.    No  other 
manuscript  of  this  version  was  known  to  exist. 

'  The  Convent  of  St.  Catharine,  at  the  base  of  Mount  Sinai,  where  Tischendorf  discovered 
the  well  known  Sinaitic  Greek  Manuscript,  holds  valuable  literary  treasures,  but  the  monks, 
since  their  experience  with  Tischendorf  having  come  to  know  the  value  of  their  manuscripts, 
are  jealous  lest  they  should  be  despoiled  of  their  treasures. 

It  was  in  February,  1892,  that  two  ladies  from  England— twin  sisters— Mrs.  Agnes  Smith 
Lewis,  widow  of  Rev.  Savap^e  Lewiw^  )^f.P.  fellow  and  Librarian  of  Corpus  Christi  Colleyre. 
Cambridge,  and  Mrs.  Margaret  Dunlop  Gibson,  visited  the  convent  of  St.  Catharine,  and 
being  suitably  introduced,  and  able  to  converse  in  modem  Greek,  the  mother  tongue  of  the 
Monks,  they  met  with  a  cordial  reception,  and  were  allowed  exceptional  privileges. 

In  their  explorations  of  decaying  manuscripts  they  came  upon  an  old  Syriac  manuscript  of 
358  pages  dating  back  to  A.  D.  778,  containing  lives  of  certain  ancient  female  saints,  which 
had  been  written  over  some  earlier  writing,  which  was  faded  and  partly  erased.  With  their 
photographic  apparatus  these  ladies  photographed  nearly  all  of  this  old  palimpsest,  bringing 
the  films  to  England  for  development,  and  there  Mr.  F.  C.  Burkitt,  and  Robt.  L.  Bensly 
deciphered  some  of  the  older  writing,  and  Mr.  Bensly  identified  it  as  a  manuscript  of  the  long 
sought  Cureton  Syriac,  or  some  closely  allied  version  of  the  Gospels. 

Early  in  1893,  the  same  Udies, accompanied  by  Messrs.  Burkitt,  Bensly,  and  Prof.  J.  Ren- 
del  Harris,  revisited  the  convent  of  St.  Catharine,  and  in  February  and  March  transcribed 
this  ancient  codex,  using  chemicals  to  restore  the  faded  letters,  which  were  too  faint  to  be 
distinctly  photographed. 

The  Syriac  manuscript  thus  recovered  contained  nearly  the  whole  of  the  four  Grospels 
about  eight  pages  being  defective.  These  Syriac  Gospels  have  been  issued  from  the  Cam- 
bridge Press,  and  an  English  translation  by  Mrs.  Lewis  has  also  appeared. 
f  These  Gospels  are  valued  for  their  antiquity,  though  for  practical  purposes  this  more  crude 
version  can  never  compete  with  the  more  accurate  Peshitto.  They  may,  however,  serve  to 
shed  some  light  on  perplexing  critical  problems.  In  the  Grospel  of  Mark  the  last  twelve 
\yerses  are  wanting.    In  Luke  ii.  14  the  reading  is,  "  good  will  towards  men.'' 

In  these  long  discarded  Syriac  Gospels  may  also  be  found  one  of  the  rare  instances  of 
intentional  intei*polations  in  the  text  which  tiiis  version  shares  pretty  closely  with  a  small 
family  of  old  Latin  manuscripts.  Thus  the  fact  of  the  miraculous  birth  of  the  Saviour  is 
distinctly  discredited  for  this  Syriac  codex  says.  Matt.  i.  16,  "  Joseph,  to  whom  Mary  the 
virgin  was  betrothed,  begat  Jesus,  who  is  called  Christ,"  and  in  verse  21  it  reads,  "ahe  shall 
bear  thee  a  son,"  and  in  verse  25,  it  omits  the  words,  ''And  knew  her  not  till,"  but  says, 
"And  he  married  his  betrothed  wife,  and  she  bare  him  a  son,  and  he  called  his  name  Jesus." 

But  that  these  changes  were  made  to  favor  certaig  Ebionite  nation8^  appears  clear  from  the 
fact  that  the  corrector  did  not  complete  his  work  or  make  it  umTorm. 

Thus  Matt.  i.  18  reads,  "The  birth  of  Jesus  took  place  as  follows:  As  Mary  his  mother, 
to  whom  Joseph  was  betrothed,  before  he  married  her,  discovered  that  she  was  with  child  by 
the  Holy  Ghost."  Verse  16  also  calls  her  "Mary  the  Virgin."  And  in  Luke  iii.  23  it 
reads,  "But  Jesus,  being  about  thirty  years  old,  called,  as  he  was,  a  son  of  Joseph." 

Hence  it  appears  that  there  were  good  reasons  for  discarding  this  version,  or  at  least  some 
copies  of  it,  as  intentionidly  though  incompletely  altered,  and  using  instead  thereof  the  ver- 
sion universally  accepted  and  preserved,  the  Peshitto. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH    OF    THE    TRANSLATOR. 


James  Murdock,  the  translator  of  The  Syriac  New  Testament,  was  bom  at 
Westbrook,  Conn.,  Feb.  16th,  1776.  He  was  the  son  of  Abraham  Murdock  and 
Hannah  Lay;  Abraham,  who  died  in  Westbrook  in  1777  at  the  age  of  26,  being 
the  sixth  of  the  seven  sons,  and  the  eleventh  of  the  thirteen  children,  borne  by 
Frances  Oonklin,  to  John  Murdock,  who  was  bom  in  East  Hampton,  Long 
Island,  in  1706,  removed  early  to  Westbrook,  was  major  of  the  provincial  troops, 
deacon  in  the  Congregational  Church,  and  judge  in  the  Court  of  Common  Pleas. 
John  was  the  only  child  of  Peter  Murdock,  who  was  born  in  Limerick,  Ireland, 
in  1679,  came  to  America  about  1700,  and  married  Mary  Fithin  of  East  Hamp- 
ton, Long  Island,  where  he  spent  most  of  his  life.  He  was  the  son  of  John  Mur> 
dock,  a  wool-comber  in  Limerick,  during  the  reigns  of  Charles  U.  and  James  II. ; 
who  married  Mary  Munson,  had  one  son  and  three  daughters,  lost  all  his  property 
in  the  siege  of  Limerick  in  1690,  and  died  about  1695. 

From  this  unconquered  and  unconquerable  Grod-fearing,  Bible-loving  Scottish 
stock,  which,  whether  in  Scotland,  Ireland,  America  or  the  ends  of  the  earth,  has 
been  so  prolific  in  noble  women,  and  wise,  thoughtful,  prudent  and  heroic  men, 
sprang  James  Murdock,  who  was  left  an  orphan  at  the  age  of  fourteen  months', 
and  passed  his  childhood  in  Westbrook  till  he  was  15  years  old.  He  had  an  in- 
satiable desire  for  knowledge,  and  with  much  effort  procured  a  Latin  Grammar 
and  Lexicon,  which  he  studied  secretly  in  the  intervals  of  severe  manual  labor, 
until  at  the  age  of  fifteen  he  commenced  to  prepare  for  college  with  his  uncle,  Bev. 
Jonathan  Murdock  of  Bozrah,  Conn.  In  Oct.  1793,  though  poorly  fitted,  he 
entered  Yale  College,  joined  the  College  Church  in  Oct.,  1794,  and  was  graduated 
in  1797,  bearing  away  the  Berkeleian  premium,  given  to  the  best  scholar  in  the 
class,  and  to  the  one  who  passed  the  best  examination  in  Latin  and  Greek ;  and^ 
taking  the  second  appointment  in  a  class  of  thirty-seven — the  first  class  which  came 
fairly  under  the  formative  influence  of  President  Dwight, — ^all  of  them  being 
natives  of  New  England ;  among  whom  were  such  men  as  Lyman  Beecher,  Henry 
Baldwin,  Judge  of  the  Supreme  Court  of  the  United  States,  Samuel  A.  Foot, 
Governor  of  Connecticut  and  United  States  Senator,  Greorge  Griffin,  Thomas  Day, 
and  Seth  P.  Staples,  eminent  in  the  legal  profession,  Horatio  Seymour,  United 
States  Senator  from  Vermont,  and  other  influential  men,  twenty-four  of  whom 
were  living,  and  twelve  of  whom  were  present  at  the  time  of  the  flrst  meeting  of 
their  class,  fifty  years  after  their  graduation. 

After  his  graduation  Mr.  Murdock  was  preceptor  of  the  Hopkins'  Grammar 
School  in  New  Haven  till  March  1799,  when  he  commenced  the  study  of  theol- 
ogy imder  President  Dwight.  In  the  autumn  of  1799,  he,  with  his  classmate 
Rev.  John  Niles,  took  charge  of  Hamilton  Oneida  Academy,  now  Hamilton 
College,  at  Clinton,  N.  Y.  In  September,  1800,  he  resumed  the  study  of  theol- 
ogy under  Rev.  A.  S.  Norton,  D.  D.,  of  Clinton,  was  Ucensed  to  preach  in  Janu- 
ary,  1801,  supplied  in  New  Hartford  till  April,  and  then  returned  to  New  Haven. 
iTirough  the  summer  of  1801  he  preached  some  time  at  Oxford,  Conn.,  and  in 
1802  he  settled  in  Princeton,  Worcester  Co.,  Mass.,  and  his  ministry  in  1810  was 
attended  by  a  revival  in  which  about  fifty  persons  were  added  to  the  church. 

While  at  Princeton  he  was  a  close  student  of  sacred  literature.  In  1815  he 
was  appointed  Professor  of  learned  languages  in  the  University  of  Vermont,  and 
removed  to  Burlington,  teaching  also  Mathematics  and  Natural  Philosophy.  In 
1818  he  was  elected  Professor  of  Languages  in  Dartmouth  College,  an  honor 

(xxxix) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Xl  BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH    OP    THE    TRANSLATOR. 

which  he  declined.  In  the  spring  of  1819  he  was  appointed  Professor  in  the 
Theological  Seminary  of  Andover,  Mass.,  and  in  the  autumn  of  that  year  Har- 
vard University  honored  him  with  the  degree  of  S.  T.  D. 

Dr.  Murdock's  term  of  service  in  Andover  might  perhaps  illustrate  the  remark 
of  the  Scotch  minister,  "  It  is  a  sair  thing  to  the  flesh,  for  a  man  to  have  a  little 
mair  light  than  his  brethren/'  Urged  in  the  strongest  manner  to  accep  t  a  pro- 
fessorship, declining  a  professorship  at  Dartmouth  at  the  same  time,  making  con- 
siderable pecuniary  sacrifice  in  leaving  his  previous  position  in  the  University  of 
Vermont,  and  receiving  on  his  departure  "  the  thanks  of  the  Corporation  of  the 
University  to  Professor  Murdock  for  his  able  and  faithful  discharge  of  the  duties 
of  his  office,"  in  July,  1819,  he  became  "B.-own  Professor  of  Sasred  Rhetoric 
and  Ecclesiastical  History,"  a  position  which  promised  to  be  exceedingly  con- 
genial with  his  tastes,  habits  and  feelings.  The  young  men  of  the  Seminary  saw 
in  Professor  Murdock  a  thoroughly  vigorous  and  critical  scholar,  a  wise  and 
accomplished  teacher,  ^  dignified,  open-hearted,  straightforward  gentleman  who 
won  their  love  and  reverence;  and  though  in  their  playful  moods  they  used  to 
sometimes  mimic  others  among  their  teachers,  they  could  never  imitate  Professor 
Murdock,  for  an  entire  absence  of  anything  like  mannerism  left  them  nothing 
to  ape.  Differences,  however,  arose,  which  led  Professor  Murdock  to  tender  the 
resignation  of  his  professorship  in  the  fall  of  1820.  It  was  not,  however,  ac- 
cepted, and  was  finally  withdrawn,  but  his  professorship  of  Ecclesiastical  History 
was  interfered  with  in  opposition  to  his  desires,  and  he  was  mainly  confined  to 
the  department  of  Sacred  Rhetoric,  in  which  he  felt  little  interest.  In  January, 
1827,  a  memorial  of  the  students,  passed  by  an  almost  unanimous  vote,  showed 
how  strong  a  hold  he  had  upon  the  young  men ;  but  at  the  next  annual  meeting 
it  was  voted  that  Dr.  Murdock's  connection  with  the  Seminary  be  dissolved.  But, 
though  cast  down.  Dr.  Murdock  was  not  destroyed.  He  wasted  little  time  over 
the  matter,  but  returned  to  New  Haven  in  1829,  where  he  devoted  himself  to 
private  studies.  Ecclesiastical  History,  and  a  wide  range  of  literary  pursuits.  He 
lived  to  see  the  day  when  his  chiefest  opposers,  who  had  done  most  to  cloud  his 
prospects,  volunteered  a  pretty  full  confession  of  their  error,  and  it  was  mutually 
agreed  that  the  past  should  be  forgiven.  Doubtless  through  the  providence  of 
God  his  usefulness,  reputation,  and  worldly  comfort  were  in  the  end  greatly  pro- 
moted by  these  mitoward  circumstances  which  had  so  disturbed  him ;  and  his  last 
visit  to  Andover  in  1852-3  was  one  of  unalloyed  pleasure  to  him. 

Dr.  Murdock  was  a  thorough  Biblical  scholar.  The  slight  knowledge  of  He- 
brew which  he  had  gained  under  President  Stiles  was  cultivated  in  later  years, 
till  the  Hebrew  Bible  was  so  familiar  that  for  a  while  he  read  directly  from  the 
Hebrew  into  English  in  his  family  devotions.  While  professor  at  Burlington,  he 
learned  German — ^journeying  to  Philadelphia  for  the  sake  of  hearing  the  language 
spoken.  He  was  surpassed  by  individuals  in  various  branches  of  learning — 
Arabic,  Sanscrit,  Hebrew,  Greek  literature.  Mathematics,  Mineralogy,  Gteology 
and  Physical  Science, — and  yet  several  of  these  departments  were  favorite  studies 
with  him,  and  in  any  of  them  he  was  capable  of  filling  a  college  professorship 
with  distinction ;  while  in  Philology,  in  the  number  of  Ancient  and  Modem  Lan- 
guages at  his  command,  in  Ancient  and  Modern  Philosophy,  in  Ecclesiastical  and 
Civil  History,  in  acquaintance  with  Society  and  the  progress  of  civilization  in  all 
ages,  he  had  few  if  any  equals. 

With  a  well-balanced  mind,  resisting  all  tendencies  to  extremes,  a  wise  sagacity 
to  detect  eternal  principles  as  distinguished  from  temporary  forms  of  expression, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


BIOGRAPHICAL    SKETCH    OF    THE    TBANSLATOB.  xU 

with  boldness  to  cast  aside  traditional  fetters,  and  a  breadth  of  yiew  which  com- 
prehended a  subject  in  all  its  bearings ;  with  a  crystaline  style  ot  thought  and 
writing,  a  wide  acquaintance  with  the  wisdom  of  ages,  a  retentive  memory  which 
seemed  to  hold  all  he  had  read  within  its  grasp ;  with  an  unobtrusive  modesty  which 
shrank  from  all  personal  display,  with  a  rare  honesty  and  truthfulness  of  charac- 
ter, and  a  wide  and  generous  charity ;  his  devotion  to  truth  and  righteousness  was 
supreme  and  hearty,  and  questions  of  minorities,  majorities  and  policies  were 
of  little  account  in  his  eyes. 

Dr.  Murdock  was  a  man  of  medium  stature,  light  complexion,  sandy  hair  ;  and 
though  not  of  robust  constitution  yet  by  careful  adherence  to  system  and  method, 
having  fixed  hours  for  study,  rest  and  exercise,  he  enjoyed  to  the  end  of  his  four- 
score years,  almost  uninterrupted  health,  and  great  equanimity  of  temper ;  though 
he  was  a  man  of  deep  feelings,  sensitive  nature,  and  strong  attachments. 

On  the  8th  of  Oct.,  1790,  Mr.  Murdack  was  married  to  Lydia  R.,  daughter  of 
Jeremiah  Atwater,  of  New  Haven.  She  proved  to  him  a  faithful  and  pious  wife, 
and  a  devoted  mother  to  their  ten  children,  some  of  whom  died  in  early  life,  and 
only  one  of  whom  still  survives — the  widow  of  Rev.  Nathaniel  S.  Richardson, 
D.  D.,  of  Bridgeport,  Ct.,  the  founder,  and  for  twenty  years  the  editor  of  "  The 
Church  Review**  to  which  we  are  largely  indebted  for  material  for  this  sketch. 

Dr.  Murdock  was  widely  known  by  his  translation  of  "Mosheim^s  Institutes  of 
Ecclesiastical  History"  in  which  he  not  only  represents  in  simple  nervous  Eng- 
lish the  exact  and  terse  Latinity  of  the  original — which  was  so  little  regarded  in 
a  former  translation — ^but  re-examines  the  grounds  of  every  statement,  and  con- 
denses in  marginal  notes  an  amount  of  additional  information  almost  equal  to 
that  contained  in  the  original  work.  This  was  first  published  in  1832,  and  has 
since  appeared  in  several  editions,  having  been  reprinted,  with  some  abridgment,  in 
Great  Britain,  and  occupying  a  place  in  the  libraries  of  students  and  clergymen 
which  can  hardly  be  filled  by  any  other  single  work.  In  1851,  he  also  published  I 
a  translation  of  **  MosheinCs  Commentaries  on  the  affairs  of  the  Christians  be/Qreji 
Constantine"  In  1842  he  published  "  Sketches  of  Modern  Philosophy,  especially  ' 
among  the  Germans;"  and  at  the  age  of  three-score  years  and  ten,  we  find  him 
reviving  his  scanty  knowledge  of  the  Syriac  language,  reading  with  the  keenest 
relish  the  "Book  of  the  Holy  Gospel  of  our  Lord  and  God  Jesus  the  Messiah,"  in 
the  very  vernacular  of  the  apostles  themselves,  and  in  the  absence  at  first  of  a 
good  Syriac  grammar,  making  one  himself,  tracing  out  step  by  step  the  forms  and 
conjugations  of  the  Syriac  verbs,  and  translating  into  English  this  ancient  version 
of  the  New  Testament,  that  others  might  share  the  benefit  he  derived  therefrom. 

At  the  age  of  eighty,  we  find  him  entering  thoroughly  upon  the  study  of  the 
Arabic  language,  and  constructing  for  his  own  use  an  Arabic  Grammar,  with  a 
precision  and  elegance  which  would  become  a  student  of  twenty  years. 

In  the  autumn  of  1855,  Dr.  Murdock  went  to  Columbus,  Mississippi,  where  he 
spent  a  delightful  winter  in  the  family  of  his  son,  visiting  various  portions  of  the 
Southern  country,  and  anticipating  a  return  to  New  Haven  the  following  spring. 
Disease,  however,  attacked  him;  his  physical  powers  gave  way,  and,  though 
everything  that  affection  could  prompt  or  skill  could  devise  was  done,  yet  the 
life-current  ebbed  away  until,  about  4  o'clock  in  the  morning  of  August  10th, 
1856,  in  the  sure  and  certain  hope  of  life  everlasting  through  Jesus  Christ  our 
Lord,  he  "  fell  on  sleep."  In  accordance  with  his  expressed  desire,  he  was  removed 
to  New  Haven,  and  laid  to  rest  in  Grove  Street  Cemetery,  beside  the  beloved 
partner  of  his  joys  and  sorrows,  who  twenty-four  years  before  had  preceded 
him  "  into  the  silent  land." 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Xlii  BIOGBAPHICAL   SKETCH   OF   THE   TBANSLATOB. 

His  last  act  on  earth  yisible  to  mortal  eye  was  to  lift  his  hand,  then  cold  in 
death,  and  point  upward  where  Hope's  anchor  is  cast  within  the  veil,  whither  Jesus 
our  forerunner  is  for  us  entered.  His  funeral  was  attended  by  an' immense  con- 
course of  people  who  paid  every  mark  of  respect  to  one  whom  they  had  so 
recently  learned  to  know  and  love.  Sturdy  men  unused  to  tears  wept  beside  his 
grave,  and  the  tide  of  their  sjonpathy  was  a  tender  consolation  to  his  far-off  friends. 
An  association  of  ministers  and  professional  gentlemen  in  New  Haven,  who  had 
known  him  more  or  less  intimately  for  sixty  years,  met  at  the  house  of  Rev.  Jere- 
miah Day,  D.  D.,  President  of  Yale  College,  August  28th,  1856,  and  in  a  memo- 
rial signed  by  President  Day,  thankfully  acknowledged  "  the  goodness  of  God 
who  qualified  him  with  eminent  gifts  of  knowledge,  wisdom  and  grace,  for  doing 
good  among  men,  and  who  called  him  to  fill  successfully  during  his  whole  life 
even  to  a  good  old  age,  various  spheres  of  usefulness,  in  the  respective  stations  of 
a  teacher  of  youth,  a  minister  of  the  gospel,  a  collegiate  professor,  a  theological 
professor,  an  associate  and  counsellor  of  his  literary  friends,  and  an  author  of 
works  prepared  and  published  to  advance  the  cause  of  Biblical  literature,  Ecclesi- 
astical History  and  theological  learning." 

Of  all  the  literary  labors  of  Dr.  Murdock,  there  were  none  to  which  he  reverted 
with  more  pleasure  than  to  his  translation  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament. 
Upon  its  appearance  it  received  the  most  cordial  and  hearty  approval  from 
Christians  of  all  classes.  The  religious  and  secular  press  united  in  commending 
the  work,  and  a  circular  signed  by  Ex-president  Day,  President  Woolsey,  four 
Professors  of  Theology  and  Sacred  Literature  in  Yale  College,  and  fourteen  Pas- 
tors of  the  leading  churches  of  New  Haven,  commended  it  as  "  a  very  interesting 
and  valuable  work  .  . .  worthy  of  a  place  in  every  Christian  family."  A  copy  of 
the  translation  was  sent  to  the  American  missionaries  among  the  Nestorians  at 
Ooromiah,  Persia,  where  the  Syriac  is  still  a  living  language — ^the  language  of 
their  Scriptures.  They  were  delighted  with  the  version,  and  showed  it  to  the  Nes-_ 
torian  Bishop,  Mar  Yohannan,  who  had  prpvini^it^lY-  yjpifift^  America  in  company 

'with-DrT Justin  f*erEins.  TKe  Bisnop  was  so  pleased  with  the  translation  that 
he  wrote  16  JJr.  jvniraocfc  a  letter  in  the  Syriac  language,  filled  with  praises  and 
thanks  for  his  excellent  translation.  This  was  accompanied  by  a  beautiful  copy 
of  the  Syriac  Bible ;  and  he  also  received  a  New  Testament  in  Ancient  and  Mod- 
em Syriac,  "  with  the  respects  of  the  Nestorian  Mission." 

"All  flesh  is  grass,  and  all. the  goodliness  thereof  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field. 
.  .  .  the  grass  withereth,  and  the  flower  fadeth,  but  the  word  of  our  God  shall 
stand  forever."  And  he  who  links  his  name  and  destiny  to  that  Word  in  living 
faith  and  loving  obedience,  shall  find  that  though  all  things  earthly  are  fading 
and  dying,  the  words  of  Christ  are  indeed  "  the  words  of  eternal  Hfe."  And  as 
the  ointment  poured  by  Mary  on  the  Saviour's  head  carried  the  fragrance  of  her 

/name  to  all  lands  and  ages ;  as  the  cross  of  Jesus  Christ  laid  upon  the  shoulder 
of  Simon  the  Cyrenian,  gave  him  a  nobility  and  a  fame  which  kings  and  con- 
querors might  envy ;  so  it  may  be  that  this  translation  of  the  Syriac  New  Testa- 
ment may  preserve  the  name  of  its  author,  when  his  eminent  attainments 
and  varied  learning,  would  otherwise  be  overlooked  in  the  rush  of  a  hurrjring 
generation.  And  when  the  learning  and  wisdom  of  the  world  are  forgotten,  when 
the  world  itself  shall  pass  away  and  the  lust  thereof,  while  he  that  doeth  the  will 
of  God  shall  abide  forever — ^it  may  be  that  the  Master's  "  well  done  "  may  have 
special  respect  to  this  effort  of  his  aged  servant  to  honor  his  Word,  and  diffuse  the 
knowledge  of  His  name  among  the  sons  of  men.  h.  l.  h. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


P  B  E  F  A  G  B. 


To  eodend  Us  own  long  cherished  but  soaaty  knowledge  of  the  Sjriac 
Itnguage,  the  writer  conunenped  reading  the  Peshitto  Syriao  New  Testa- 
ment in  January,  1845,  and  at  every  step  he  found  increasing  delight 
Hie  artless  dmplicity,  directness,  and  transparency  of  the  style, — the 
propriety  and  beauty  of  the  conceptions  of  Qirist  and  lus  followers,  as 
expressed  in  a  Shemitish  dialect  very  nearly  identical  with  their  vernacular 
tongue, — the  pleasing  thought  that  the  words  were,  probably,  in  great  part, 
the  very  terms  which  the  Saviour  and  his  Apostles  actually  uttered  in  their 
discourses  and  conversations, — and  especially  the  full  comprehension  which 
the  Syriao  translator  seemed  to  have  of  the  force  and  meaning  of  the 
inspired  qjgnaL  served  to  diain  attention  and  hold  the  mind  spell-bound 
to  the  book.  Such  exquisite  pleasure  the  writer  longed  to  have  others 
share  with  lum ;  but  as  few  persons,  even  among  the  clergy,  have  either 
teisure  or  fiunlities  for  acquiring  the  Syriao  language,  he  soon  came  to  the 
eonolusion,  that  he  could  do  nothing  better  than  first  read  the  book  care- 
fblly  through,  and  then  give  a  literal  and  exact  translation  of  it.  Accord- 
ingly  he  furnished  himself  with  several  of  the  best  editions  of  the  book, 
and  the  best  Syriao  Lexicons  and  Grammars,  and  commenced  his  transla- 
tion  early  in  August,  1845,  and  completed  it  on  the  16th  of  June,  1846k 

TUs  b  hnefy  the  history  of  the  work  here  presented  to  the  public 

(xliii) 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


xliv  PREFACE. 


The  Syriao  text  followed  in  the  first  part  of  this  translation,  was  thai 
of  the  beautiful  edition  printed  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society 
London^  1816,^4^0^  which  was  prepared  for  the  press,  as  far  as  the  Acts  of 
the  Apostles,  by  the  late  Rev.  Claudius  Buchanan,  D.D.,  Author  of 
''Qiristian  Researches,"  ''Star  in  the  East,"  &c.,  and  the  remainder  by  the 
Rev.  Samuel  Lee,  D.D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University  of 
Cambridge,  England.  The  latter  part  of  the  translation  was  made  from 
the  second  edition  of  th^  same  Bible  Society,  London,  1826,  4to. ;  but  the 
text  of  Leusden  and  Schaafs  edition,  Leyden,  1717,  was  everywhere 
consulted,  and  much  use  was  made  of  their  Latin  translation  of  it.  The 
pocket  edition  of  Gutbir,  Hambui^h,  1664,  12mo.,  was  also  generally  con- 
sulted. The  Lexicons  constantly  used  throughout,  were  the  Lexicon 
Syriacum  Concordantiale  in  Nov.  Testamentum  of  Charles  Schaaf,  Leyden, 
1717,  4to. ;  the  Lexicon  Syriacum  of  Edmund  Castell,  revised  and 
enlarged  by  J.  D.  Michaelis,  Gottingen,  1788,  4to. ;  and  the  small  Lex 
icon  Syriacum  in  Nov.  Testamentum  of  Giles  Gutbir,  bound  up  with  his 
Syriac  New  Testament.  The  Grammars  relied  upon  were,  the  elaborate 
GrammaticsB  Syriacte  Libri  iiL  of  Andr.  Theoph.  Hofimann,  Philos.  et 
Theol.  Doctor,  Halle,  1827,  4to. ;  and  the  Elementarlehre  der  syrischeo 
Sprache,  by  Prof.  Fred.  Uhlemann,  Berlin,  1829, 8vo. 

In  this  translation,  the  Books  of  the  New  Testament  are  divided  into 
Paragraphs,  according  to  the  sense ;  just  as  in  Campbell's  translation  of 
the  Four  Gospels,  and  in  the  Greek  Testaments  of  Bengel,  Griesbach, 
Knapp,  and  others.  The  common  divisions  into  Chapters  and  Verses  are 
noted  in  the  margin,  and  the  Verses  are  also  put  in  parentheses  in  the 
middle  of  the  lines.  For  the  benefit  of  those  who  have  some  knowledge 
of  the  Syriac  language,  the  more  important  words  are  frequently  placed  in 
the  side  margin,  with  references  to  the  corresponding  words  in  the  transla- 
tion. Deviations  of  the  Syriac  text  ftom  the  Greek,  and  also  the  suscep 
Abilities  of  the  Syriac  words,  or  phrases,  of  a  difierent  rendering  from  tha^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACE.  3^iv 


bi  the  text,  are  likewise  indicated  in  the  side  margin.    The  foot  inarf^  b 
resenred  (or  occasional  comments  and  critical  observations. 
The  principles  adopted  in  this  translation,  were : 

(1)  To  translate,  as  literally  as  possible,  in  consistence  with  idiomatic 
and  perspicuous  English. 

(2)  To  use  Saxcm  phraseology  ia  preference  to  Latin,  as  better  accord 
ing  with  the  q>irit  of  the  Peshitto  originaL 

(8)  To  adopt  the  obsolescent  and  solemn  style  of  the  English  Bible, 
e.  g.  thou  tpeakut^  he  tpeakeihy  y$  speak,  instead  of  you  speak,  he  speaks^ 
4ml,  as  more  seemly  for  this  holy  Book. 

(4)  To  write  the  proper  names  of  persons  and  places,  which  are  men- 
tioned in  the  Old  Testament,  as  they  are  written  in  our  English  Old 
Testament ;  and  those  which  occur  only  in  the  New  Testament,  as  they 
are  written  in  our  English  New  Testament.  This  is  the  rule  adopted  by 
Dr.  Oampbeil  in  his  translation  of  the  Four  Gospels.  Yet  '{^^  ^  ^^ 
(Meshihha)  has  been  translated  Messiah,  and  not  Christ ;  and  ^QJkkl* 
{Shmiwm)  has  been  translated  Simon,  and  not  Pet$r. 

(5)  In  general,  to  avoid  using  technical  theological  terms,  when  good 
substitutes  could  be  found,  in  order  to  call  away  attention  from  the  word 
to  the  thing:  thus  1»»  i\>  (an  Apostle)  is  rendered  Legate;  and 
|1  i  »».V>  {Saviour)  is  rendered  Vivifier,  as  being  more  literal,  for  the  verb 
U-^<*  (especially  in  the  Conjug.  Aphel,  *mm\)  properly  signifies  to  make 
alive,  to  vivify ;  and  its  derivatives  ^  s'l  »»  and  f1  ■  »>i.V>  properly  signify 
life,  and  Ufo-giver,  or  vivifier.  These  are  the  usual  terms  of  the  Syriac 
version,  denoting  that  salvation  which  Christ  bestows  on  fkllen  men,  who 
are  represented  as  ^^dead  in  trespasses  and  mn.y/The  terms  \oo^ 
{Uberaior,  deliverer)  and  )jj3)a2>  (deliverance)  are  indeed  sometimes 
used  of  this  salvation,  but  less  frequently. — Yet  there  is  one  family  of 
Syriac  technicals,  which  have  been  rendered  by  the  English  technicals  (bi 
the  same  ideas,  to  the  neglect  of  their  primary  meaning.     They  are  |&Q1| 


Digitized  by 


Gobgk' 


xlvi  PREFACE. 


(properly,  intransitive,  to  $iand  tip,  lo  stand  firrn^)  whioh  is  translated,  l»  hi 
baptiged: — ^|Loi!)  (literally,  transitive,  to  eaute  another  lo  Mttmd^  i$ 
mtabUih),  translated,  to  baptize: — ]l|VriSV>  (an  6$tabU$her^  OLe  who  makf$ 
oth$r9  to  itcmd),  translated,  a  bapt%M9r : — and  lAiijOl^HiO  (a  ttamding  t^), 
^.ranslated,  baptUm. 

(6)  To  translate  idiomatie  pErases^not  fully  naturalized  in  the  English 
language,  by  equivalent  English  phrases,  and  not  to  transfer  them  in  their 
foreign  costume.  Thus,  L  i  n\nl  (a  fieder  on  detraction),  an  epithet  of 
Atlofi,  is  translated  a  calumniator: — |^0|\so  {lord  of  mnut^y  is 
translated  an  enemy: — ^)Aa^  «o5  {nu^or^domue)  is  rendered,  aeteward: 
— ]ZoAa^  AoJ  {mastership  of  ike  lumse)  is  rendered  stmoardship : — 
|g>|n  t^mV>  {accepting  Jwes)  b  rendered,  having  respect  o/ persons,  or 
partiality : — l^))^  >infni  {assumers  of  fices)  is  rendered  hypocrites : — 
ImOJ  tO^V)  {letting  out  breath),  apologizing,  or  defending  one's  se^: 
and  Xk^oi  Ji  yt  V>  {holding  the  breath),  being  patient,  or  long  suJMng : — 
Iki)  iJ^J  {living  away  from  roofo,  roaming  infields)  are  lunatics.  So  also 
many  compounds  of  ^,  a  son,  and  of  AaO,  a  house  or  home,  are  para- 
phrased; e.  g.  son  of  his  city,  rendered,  his  frUouhdtizen : — son  of  my 
yoke,  rendered,  my  yokefellow,  or  colleague: — son  of  forty  years,  rend^^ 
forty  years  old: — son  of  their  trade,  rendered,  one  of  their  occupation: — 
son  of  a  man,  rendered,  a  man: — sons  of  men,  rendered  men;  &o.  And 
house  of  the  prisoners,  translated,  a  prison : — hsmse  {home)  of  (h$  dead, 
translated,  a  grave,  or  sepulchre: — house  of  gatherings,  translated,  a  ^oiiMr, 
or  store-house: — house  of  the  publicans,  translated,  a  custom  house : — house 
(home)  of  olives,  translated,  an  olive  yard: — house  {home)  of  the  eyes, 
translated,  the  forehead;  &c 

When  the  translator  had  finished  his  work,  he  supposed  that  he  had 
produced  the  only  English  translation  of  the  New  Testament  ever  made 
from  thePeshitto;  but  after  about  three  mondis,  the  London  press  issued 
a  book,  entitled,  ^  A  Literal  Translation  of  the  Four  Gospels  from  tlit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PREFACE.  xWn 


Peshitto,  by  J.  W.  Etheridge ;  "  and  announced,  as  in  preparation,  by 
the  same  author,  "The  Apostolical  Acts  and  Epistles,  from  the 
Peshitto/'  The  Gospels  of  Mr.  Etheridge  were  speedily  pro<?ared; 
but,  on  comparing  them  with  this  version,  the  plan  and  aims  of  Mr. 
Etheridge  were  found  to  be  so  diverse  from  his  own,  that  the  trans- 
lator had  no  hesitation  in  going  forward  with  his  work.  Accord- 
ingly, he  continued  to  revise  and  correct  it;  and,  for  the  sake  of 
improving  it,  as  he  found  opportunity,  he  pursued  the  study  of  the 
Syriac  language  and  literature,  for  more  than  four  years.  The 
result  he  now  presents  to  the  Christian  public,  hoping  it  may  prove 
both  interesting  and  useful  to  all  such  as  are  anxious  to  perfect 
themselves  in  the  knowledge  of  the  holy  Scriptures  of  the  New 
Testament. 

JAMES  MUEDOCK. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Aimotaii^iiient  of  Matthew  the  Legate 


L     Thb  book  of  the  nativity*  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  •  Sy. 

the  son  of  David,  son  of  Aoraham.  ^2o 

2      Abraham  begat  Isaac:  Isaac  begat  Jacob:  Jacob 

5  begat  Judah  and  his  brothers:  (8)  Judah  begat 
Pharez  and  Zara  of  Tamar:  Pharez  begat  Hezron: 

4  Hezron  )>egat  Bam:  (4)  Ram  begat  Aminadab: 
Aminadab  begat  Nahshon:   Nahshon  begat  Sal* 

6  mon:   (5)  Salmon  be^t  Boaz  of  Bahab:   Boaz 

6  begat  Obed  of  Buth :  Obed  begat  Jesse :  (6)  Jesse 
begat  David  the  king:  David  begat  Solomon  of 

7  the  wife  of  Uriah :  (7)  Solomon  begat  Behoboam: 

8  Behoboam  begat  Abia:  Abia  begat  Asa :  (8)  Asa 
begat  Jehoshaphat:    Jehoshaphat   begat  Joram: 

9  Joram  begat  uzziah:  (9)  ITzziah  begat  Jotham: 

10  Jotham  begat  Ahaz:  Ahaz  begat  Hezekiah:  (10) 
Hezekiah  begat  Manasseh:  Manasseh  begat  Amon: 

11  Amon  begat  Josiah:  fll)  Josiah  begat  Jeconiah 
and  his  brothers,  in  tne  captivity  of  Babylon.^ 

12  (12)  And  after  the  captivitv  of  Babylon,  Jeconiah 
18  begat  Salathiel:  Salathiel  begat  Zerubbabel:  (18); 

Zerubbabel  begat  Abiud:  Abiud  begat  Eliakim;i 

14  Eliakim  begat  Azor:   (14)  Azor  begat  Zadok: 

15  Zadok  begat  Achim:  Achim  begat  Eliud:  (15) 
Eliud   begat   Eleazar:    Eleazar  begat   Matthan: 

16  Matthan  begat  Jacob :  (16)  Jacob  begat  Joseph, 
the  husband  of  Mary,  of  whom  was  bom  Jesus 

17  who  is  called  the  Messiah.^  (17)  All  the  genera- 
tions,, therefore,  are,  from  Abraham  to  David 
fourteen  generations,  and  from  David  to  the  cap- 
tivity of  Babylon  fourteen  generations,  and  from 
the  captivity  of  Babylon  to  the  Messiah  fourteen 
generations. 


*\^^ 


Sy.]>»  i  •'v 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   II. 


dSy.1ocnlj]D 


«  Sy.  ^a.flui 

root  91D\ 

Hiph.  y^TDin, 

salvavit. 
'»y.  OjlkkJ 

Gr.  (fui(fu. 
«Sy. 


•  Sy.  •CDjoSoi 
«>Sy. 


«=  Sy. 


*  or,  66  shepherd 
of 


And  the  birth  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  was  thus.  18 
While  his  mother  Mary  was  betrothed  to  Joseph, 
before  they  had  cohabited,  she  was  found  to  be 
with  child  by  the  Holy  Spirit    (19)  And  Joseph  19 
her  husband  was  a  righteous<^  man,  and  unwilling 
to  expose  her:  and  he  thought  of  putting  her 
away  privately.    (20)  And  while  he  contemplated  20 
these  things,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared  to  him 
in  a  dream,  and  said  to  him:  Joseph,  son  of 
David,  fear  not  to  take  Manr  thy  wire;  for  that 
which  is  conceived  in  her,  is  from  the  Holy  Spirit: 
(21)  and  she  will  bear  a  son;  and  thou  shalt  call  21 
his  name  Jesus,«  for  he  will  resuscitate^  his  people 
from  their  sins.     (22)  Now  all  this  that  occurred,  22 
was  to  fulfill  what  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 
prophet:  (23)  Behold,  a  virgin  will  conceive,  and  28 
will  bear  a  son,  and  thou  shalt  call  his  name 
Emmanuel,?  which  is  interpreted.  Our  God  with 
us.    (24)  And  when  Joseph  rose  from  his  sleep,  24 
he  did  as  the  angel  of  the  Lord  commanded  him, 
iand  took  his  wife.     (25)  And  he  knevf  her  not,  25 
until  she  had  borne  her  firstborn  son,  and  called 
his  name  Jesus. 


Now  when  Jesus  was  bom  in  Bethlehem  of  II 
Judaea,  in  the  days  of  Herod*  the  king,  there  came  "- 
Magi*>  from  the  east  unto  Jerusalem,  (2)  saying:     2 
Where  is  the  king  of  the  Jews  that  is  bom  ?    For 
we  have  seen  his  star  in  the  east,  and  have  come 
to  worship  him.     (3)  And  Herod  the  king  heard,     3 
and  he  was  disturbed;   and  aU  Jerusalem  with 
him.     (4)  And  he  assembled  all  the  chiefs  of  the    4 
priests*^  and  the  scribes  of  the  people,  and  inquired 
of  them.  Where  is  the  birthplace  of  the  Messiah  ? 
(5)  And  they  said :  In  Bethlehem  of  Judaea ;  for    5 
thus  it  is  written  in  the  prophet:  (6)  Thou  also,     6 
Bethlehem  of  Judaea,  art  not  the  little  among  the 
kings  of  Judaea,  for  a  king  shall  come  from  thee 
who  shall  rule<^  my  people  Israel.    (7)  Then  Herod    7 
privately  called  tne  Magi,  and  leamed  from  them 
at  what  time  the  star  appeared  to  them.    (8)  And    8 
he  sent  them  to  Bethlenem,  and  said  to  them.  Go, 
search  diligently  for  the  child ;  and  when  ye  have 
found  him,  come  and  tell  me,  that  I  also  may  go 
and  worship  him.    (9)  And  they,  when  they  had    9 
heard  from  the  king,  went  forward:  and  lo,  the 


'^f^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   II. 


18 


14 


star  they  had  seen  in  the  east  went  before  them, 
until  it  came  and  stood  over  where  the  child  was. 

10  (10)  And  when  they  saw  the  star,  they  rejoiced 

11  much,  with  great  joy.  (11)  And  they  entered  the 
house;  and  they  saw  the  child,  with  Mary  his 
mother ;  and  they  fell  down  and  worshipped  him : 
and  they  opened  their  treasures,  and  presented  to 

12  him  gifts,  gold,  and  myrrh,  and  frankincense.  (12) 
And  it  was  shown  them  in  a  dream,  that  they 
should  not  return  to  Herod.  And  by  another 
way,  they  returned  to  their  country. 

And  when  they  were  gone,  an  angel  of  the  Lord 
appeared  to  Joseph  in  a  dream,  and  said  to  him, 
Arise,  take  the  child  and  his  mother,  and  flee  into 
Egypt;  and  be  thou  there,  until  I  tell  thee:  for 
Herod  will  seek  for  the  child,  to  destroy  it  (14) 
Then  Joseph  arose,  took  the  child  and  his  mother, 

15  by  night,  and  fled  to  E^pt.  (15)  And  he  was 
there,  until  the  death  of  Herod ;  that  so  might  be 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  of  the  Lord  by  the 
prophet,  saying,  From  Egypt  have  I  called  my 

16  son.  (16)  Then  Herod,  when  he  saw  that  he  had 
been  deluded  by  the  Magi,  was  very  angry.  And 
he  sent  and  slew  all  the  children  in  Bethlehem, 
and  in  all  its  confines,  from  a  child  of  two  years 
and  under,  according  to  the  time  that  he  had 

17  carefully  learned  from  the  Magi  (17)  Then  was 
that  fulfilled^  which  was  spoken  by  Jeremiah  the 

18  prophet,  saying :  (18)  A  voice  was  heard  in  Bama, 
weeping  and  great  lamentation;  Eachel  bemoaning 
her  children,  and  unwilling  to  be  comforted,  be- 

19  cause  they  are  no  more.  (19)  But  when  king 
Herod  was  dead,  an  angel  of  the  Lord  appeared 

20  in  a  dream  to  Joseph  in  Egypt,  (20)  and  said  to 
him:  Arise,  take  the  child  and  his  mother,  and  go 
into  the  land  of  Israel ;   for  they  are  dead  who 

21  sought  the  life  of  the  child.  (21)  And  Joseph 
arose,  and  took  the  child  and  his  mother,  and 

22  went  to  the  land  of  Israel.  (22)  But  when  he 
heard  that  Archelaus  was  king  in  Judaea,  instead 
of  his  father  Herod,  he  feared  to  go  thither.  And 
it  was  revealed  to  him  in  a  dream,  that  he  should 

28  go  into  the  land  of  Galilee.®  (28)  And  he  came 
and  dwelt  in  a  city  that  is  called  Nazareth '/  that 
so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which  was  said  by  the 
prophet,  that  he  should  be  called  a  Nezarene.« 


•  Sy.  ]]^ 

'  Sy.  Li^ 

Sy.  ViJ^, 

an  adjective 
from  the  pre- 
ceding. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   III. 


Sy. 

r 


^  By.  ]jlO0>1 


'  Le.8oeoffiman 
Hfe  teaches  us. 


'  or,  fTidbef^ 
So  also  the 
other  verbs. 

^  i,^  fire  suffer- 
edtobumon 
and  consume 
what  is  in  it, 

»»  8y  \2jQjh 


2 


6 


And  in  those  days  came  John«^  the  Baptiz-III 
er. »»     And  he  proclaimed  in  the  desert  of  Judsea, 
(2)  and  said:  Eepent;  the  kingdom  of  heaven  hath 
approached.    (3)  For  this  is  he  of  whom  it  was  said, 
by  Isaiah  the  prophet :  The  voice  of  one  crying  in 
the  wilderness,  rrepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord, 
make  smooth  his  paths.    (4)  And  as  to  this  John, 
his  raiment  was  of  camel's  hair,  and  a  girdle  of 
skin  was  upon  his  loins ;  and  his  fok)d  was  locusts 
and  wild   uoney.     (5)   Then   went  out   to  him 
Jerusalem,   and  all  Judaea,  and  all  the  country 
about  the  Jordan.     (6)  And  they  were  baptized 
by  him  in  the  river  Jordto,  while  they  confessed 
their  sins.    (7)  But  when   he  saw  many  of  the    7 
Pharisees*^  and  of  the  Sadducees,*^  who  came  to  be 
baptized,  he  said  to  them :  Generation  of  vipers, 
who  hath  taught  you  to  flee  from  the  wrath  that 
Cometh?    (8)  Bring  forth  the  fruits  therefore,  that    8 
accord  with  repentance.    (9)  And  do  not  think,    9 
and  say  within  yourselves,  tTiat  Abraham  is  our 
father :  for  I  say  to  you,  that  God  is  able  of  these 
stones  to  raise  up  children  to  Abraham.    (10)  And  10 
lo,  the  ax  is  put  to  the  root  of  trees.®    Every  tree, 
therefore,  which  beareth  not  good  fruit,  is  felled, 
and  &lleth  into  the  flre.    (11)  I  indeed  baptize  11 
you  with  water  unto  repentance;    but  he  that 
Cometh  after  me  is  more  powerful  than  I;  whose 
sandals  I  am  not  worthy  to  carry.    He  will  baptize 
you  with  the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  fire.    (12)  BHs  12 
winnowing  shovel  is  in  his  hand;   and  he  will 
make^  clean  his  threshing-floor.    The  wheat  he 
will  gather  into  his  storehouse;  and  the  chaff  he 
will  bum  with  fire  not  extinguished.? 

Then  came  Jesus  from  §alilee  to  the  Jordan  13 
unto  John,  to  be  baptized  by  him.    (14)  But  John  14 
refused  him;  and  said,  I  need  to  be  baptized  by 
thee,  and  hast  thou  come  to  me?    (15)  And  Jesus  16 
answered,  and  said  to  him :  Allow  it  now,  for  thus 
it  becometh  us  to  fulfill  all  righteousness.*^     Then 
he  permitted  him.     (16)  And  when  Jesus  was 
baptized,  he  went  up  immediately  from  the  water. 
And  heaven  was  opened  to  him ;  and  he  saw  the 
Holy  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove,  and  it  came 
upon  him.    (17)  And  lo,  a  voice  from  heaven, 
which  said :  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I 
have  delight. 


16 


17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW.  IV. 


IV, 


2 
8 


Then  was  Jesus  led  by  the  Holy  Spirit  into 
the  desert,  to  be  tempted  by  the  Calumniator.* 
(2)  And  he  fasted  forty  days  and  forty  nights,  and 
afterward  he  hungered  (3)  And  the  Tempter 
came,  and  said  to  him:  If  thou  art  the  Son  of 

4  God,  command  these  stones  to  become  bread.  (4) 
But  he  replied,  and  said :  It  is  written,  tiiat  not  by 
bread  only,  doth  man  live;  but  by  eve^  word 

5  proceeding  fixmi  the  mouth  of  GxkL  (6)  Tten  the 
Calumniator  took  him  to  the  holy  city,  and  set 

6  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  (6)  and  said  to 
him:  K  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  cast  thyself 
down:  for  it  is  written,  that  he  will  give  his 
angels  charge  of  thee,  and  in  their  hands  will  they 
sustain  thee,  lest  thou  strike  thy  foot  against  a 

7  stone.  (7)  Jesus  said  to  him:  It  is  moreover 
written,  that  thou  shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  tiiy 
God.  (8)  Again  the  Calumniator  took  him  to  a 
mountain  that  was  very  high,  and  showed  him  all 

9  the  kingdoms  of  the  world,  and  their  glory ;  (9) 
and  said  to  him :  All  these  will  I  give  thee,  if  thou 
wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me.  (10)  Then  Jesus 
said  to  him :  Begone,  Satan  ;b  for  it  is  written,  that 
thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord,  thy  God ;  and  him 
only  shalt  thou  serve.  (11)  Then  the  Calumniator 
left  him:  and  lo,  angels  came,  and  ministered  to 
him. 

And  when  Jesus  had   heard  that  John  was 

15  delivered  up,  he  retired  to  Galilee.  (IS)  And  he 
left  Nazareth,  and  came  and  dwelt  in  Capernaum,® 
by  the  side  of  the  sea,  on  the  confines  of  Zebulon 

14  and  Naphthali.  (14)  That  so  might  be  fulfilled  that 
which  was  spoken  by  Isaiah  the  prophet,  who  said: 

16  (16)  The  land  of  Zebulon,  the  land  of  Naphthali, 
the  way  of  the  sea,  the  ford  of  Jordan,  Galilee  of 

16  the  Gentiles ;  (16)  the  people  that  sat  in  darkness, 
have  seen  great  hght ;  ana  to  them  who  sat  in  the 
region  and  shadow  of  death,  light  is  arisen. 

17  From  that  time  began  Jesus  to  proclaim  and 
say:  Bepent;  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  hath 
approached.  (18)  And  as  he  walked  on  the  shore 
of  the  sea  of  Galilee,  he  saw  two  brothers,  Simon** 
called  Cephas,®  and  Andrew^  his  brother,  who  were 
casting  nets  into  the  sea ;  for  they  were  fishermen. 
(19)  And  Jesus  said  to  them :  Follow  me ;  and  I 
will  cause  you  to  become  fishers  of  men.   (20)  And 


18 


19 


8 


10 


11 


12 


*  an  appellaibn 
ofSitan. 


Sy.  ]i  (^tr% 


•Sy. 


^  Sy.  ^aikiA 
e  Sy.  ]a]o 
'  By.  «a)ol5|jl 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   V. 


^  Sy.  w^l 


*  or,  too*  heard, 
>  Sy.  LJOCD 

"•  Sy.  ll(Lj, 
ft.  Kj,- 
a  demon, 

n  or,  roamerSf 
the  houseless^ 
or,  st<c^  05 
roam  in  the 
fields. 

o  or,  the  ford  of. 


•  Sy.  wmO^O 
>>  or,  /Ae  Zarui. 


c   or  trorff . 


d  Sy.  salted. 
«  Sy,  goes  for. 

f  Sy.lia^ 


immediately,  they  left  their  nets,  and  went  after  him. 
(21)  And  as  he  passed  on  from  there,  he  saw  two  21 
other  brothers,  James^  the  son  of  Zebedee*'  and 
John'  his  brother,  in  a  ship  with  Zebedee  their 
father,  who  were  mending  their  nets.  And  Jesus 
called  them.  (22)  And  they  immediately  left  the  22 
ship  and  their  father,  and  went  after  him. 

And  Jesus  travelled  over  all  Galilee  ;   and  he  23 
taught  in  their   synagogues,  and  proclaimed   the 
tidings    of    the   kingdom;    and    he    cured    every 
disease  and  malady  among  the  people.     (24)  And  24 
his  fame    spread^  through  all  Syria.^      And  they 
brought   to  him   all   them    that    were    very    sick 
with  diverse  diseases,/ and  them  that  were  afflicted 
with    pains,   and    demoniacs,™   and  lunatics,"   and 
paralytics  ;  and  he  healed  them.     (25)  And  there  25 
followed  him  great   multitudes  from   Galilee,  and 
from  the  Ten  Cities,  and  from  Jerusalem,  and  from 
Judaea,  and  from  beyond®  the  Jordan. 

And  when  Jesus  saw  the  multitudes,  he  ascend-  T. 
ed  a  hill ;  and  when  he  was  seated,  his  disciples 
drew  near  him:   (2)  and  he  opened  his  mouth,  and    2 
taught  them,  and  said:  (8)  Blessed  are  the  poor    3 
in  spirit:^  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs  I 
(4)  Blessed  are  the  mourners:   for  they  shall  be    4 
comforted!     (5)  Blessed  are  the  meek:  for  they    6 
shaU  inherit  the  earth  !>>    (6)  Blessed  are  they  that    6 
hunger  and  thirst  for  righteousness:  for  they  shall 
be  satiated  I    (7)  Blessed  are  the  merciful :  for  on    7 
them  shall  be  mercies !     (8)  Blessed  are  the  clean    8 
in  heart :  for  they  shall  behold  God  I     (9)  Blessed    9 
are  the  cultivators  of  peace:   for  they  shall  he 
called  sons  of  God  I    (10)  Blessed  are  they  that  10 
are  peraecuted  on  account  of  righteousness:  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  theirs!     (11)  Blessed  11 
are  ye,  when  they  revile  you  and  persecute  you, 
and  speak  every  evil  thing®  against  you,  falsely, 
on  my  account    (12)  At  that  time,  rejoice  and  be  12 
glad :  for  your  reward  in  heaven  is  great.    For  so 
QiCT  persecuted  the  prophets  that  were  before  you. 

Ye  are  the  salt  of  tne  earth !     But  if  the  salt  13 
become  insipid,  with  what  shall  it  be  seasoned  ?d 
It  is  fit®  for  nothing ;  but  to  be  thrown  out,  and  be 
trodden  under  foot  by  men.    (14)  Ye  are  the  light  14 
of  the  world  If    A  city  built  upon  a  hill,  cannot 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   V. 


16  be  concealed.  (16)  And  they  do  not  light  a  lamp 
and  place  it  under  a  bushel;*  but  upon  a  light- 
stand^  and  it  giveth  light  to  all  that  are  in  the 

16  house.  (16)  Let  your  nght  so  shine  before  men, 
that  they  may  see  your  good  works,  and  may 
glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

17  Do  not  suppose  that  I  have  come  to  subvert  the 
law,*»  or  the  prophets :  [I  have  come]  not  to  sub- 

18  vert,  but  to  fulfill.  (18)  For  verily  I  say  to  you, 
that  until  heaven  and  earth  shall  pass  away,  one 
iota  or  one  letter*  shall  not  pass  from  the  law, 

19  until  all  shall  be  fulfilled.  (19)  Therefore,  who- 
ever shall  break  one  of  these  small  commands,  and 
shall  so  inculcate  on  the  children  of  men,  shall  be 
called  little  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but  every 
one  that  shall  do  and  teach  [them],  shall  be  called 

20  great  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (20)  For  I  say 
to  you,  that  unless  your  righteousness  shall  abound 
more  than  that  of  the  Scribes*^  and  Pharisees,*  ye 
shall  not  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 

21  Ye  have  heard  that  it  was  said  to  the  ancients, 
Thou  shalt  not  kill :  and  every  one  that  killeth,  is 

22  obnoxious  to  judgment  (22)  But  I  say  to  you, 
That  every  one  who  is  angry  with  his  brother 
rashly,™  is  obnoxious  to  judgment:  and  every  one 
that  saith  to  his  brother,  Baka !»  is  obnoxious  to 
the  coimcil  :<>  and  every  one  that  shall  say.  Fool  !p 

23  is  obnoxious  to  helU-fire.  (23)  If  therefore  thou 
shalt  bring  thy  oblation  to  the  altar,  and  shalt 
there  remember  that  thy  brother  hath  any  offence* 

24  against  thee,  (24)  leave  there  thy  oblation  before 
the  altar,  and  go  first  and  be  reconciled  with  thy 
brother;  and  then  come  and  present  thy  oblation. 

25  (25)  Be  at  aOTcement  with  tny  prosecutor,  forth- 
with, and  while  on  the  way  with  him;  lest  the 
prosecutor  deliver  thee  up  to  the  judge,  and  the 
judge  deliver  thee  over  to  the  sheriff,*  and  thou 

26  Mi  into  the  house  of  prisoners.  (26)  Verily  I  say 
to  thee,  Thou  wilt  not  come  out  from  there  untd 
thou  hast  paid  the  last  farthing.^ 

27  Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said.  Thou  shalt 

28  not  commit  adultery.  (28)  But  I  say  to  you,  That 
whoever  gazeth  on  a  woman  with  concupiscence,  at 
once  committeth  adultery  with  her  in  his  heart 

29  (29)  If  therefore  thy  right  eye  make  thee  offend, 
pluck  it  out,  and  cast  it  from  thee;  because  it  is 


Heb.rmD 


Sy.  IJisifiO 

Sy.  ]cu\ 

Sy.lo* 

Sy. 

sy.in. 

Sy.  poi^ 

Sy.lAol 

Sy.Ua^ 

Sy.  IjOlOa 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,    V. 


^  Sy.  profitable. 
X  Sy.  and  not. 


*  Sy.  ]l  i/on, 
Gr.  p^iTwva. 

'  Sy.  Uo^^^ 


»>Sy. 


better'^  for  thee  that  thy  one  member  perish,  than> 
that  thy  whole  body  fell  into  hell.y  (80)  And  if  80 
thy  right  hand  msUke  thee  offend,  cut  it  ofl^  and 
cast  it  from  thee ;  because  it  is  better  for  thee  that 
one  of  thy  members  perish,  than  that  thy  whole 
body  fall  into  hell. 

It  hath  been  said,  That  if  a  man  will  put  away  his  81 
wife,  he  must  give  her  a  writing  of  divorcement. 
(82)  But  I  say  to  you,  That  whoever  putteth  away  82 
his   wife,   except  for  the   offence  of  whoredom, 
causeth  her  to  conmiit  adultery :    and  he  that 
taketh  the  divorced  woman,  committeth  adultery. 

Again,  ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said  to  88 
the  ancients.  Thou  shalt  not  be  false  in  thy  oaths; 
but  thou  shalt  perform  thine  oaths  to  the  Lord. 
(84)  But  I  say  to  you.  Swear  not  at  all:  not  by  84 
heaven,  for  it  is  the  throne  of  God:  (85)  and  not  85 
by  the  earth,  for  it  is  the  footstool  imder  his  feet : 
and  likewise  not  by  Jerusalem,  for  it  is  the  city 
of  the  great  king.     (36)  Moreover,  thou  shalt  not  86 
swear  by  thv  head,  for  thou  canst  not  make  one 
hair  in  it  either  black  or  white.    (87J  But  let  your  87 
language  be.  Yes,  yes ;  or  No,  no ;  for  whatever  is 
beyond  these  proceedeth  from  evil. 

Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said :  An  eye  88 
for  an  eye,  and  a  tooth  for  a  tooth.    (89)  But  I  say  89 
to  you :  Resist  not  evil ;  but  if  a  person  smite  thee 
on  thy  ri^ht  cheek,  turn  to  him  the  other  also. 

(40)  And  if  one  is  disposed  to  sue  thee  and  get  40 
away  thy  coat,*  relinquish  to  him  also  thy  cloaK.» 

(41)  Whoever  compeUeth  thee  to  go  one  mile,  go  41 
with  him  two.    (42)  Whoever  demandeth  of  thee,  42 

S've  to  him:  and  whoever  wisheth  to  borrow  of 
ee,  deny  him  not. 

Ye  have  heard  that  it  hath  been  said: -Thou  48 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor,  and  hate  thy  enemy.** 
(44)  But  I  say  to  you :  Love  your  enemies ;  and  44 
bless  him  that  curseth  you;  and  do  good  to  him 
that  hateth  you ;  and  pray  for  them  that  lead  you 
in  bonds,  and  that  persecute  you:   (45)  that  ye  45 
may  be  the  children  of  your  Father  tnat  is  in 
heaven,  who  causeth  his  sun  to  rise  upon  the  good 
and  upon  the  bad,  and  sendeth  his  rain  upon  the 
righteous  and  upon  the  unrighteous.     (46)  For,  if  46 
ye  love  them  that  love  you,  what  reward  nave  ye? 
Do  not  even  the  pubh'cans  do  this?    (47)  Ana  if  47 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   VI. 


r 


ye  salute  your  brethren  only^  what  do  ye  that  is 
not  common?    Do  not  even  publicans  do  this? 
48  (48)  Be  ye  therefore  perfect;  eren  as  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  is  perfect 

VL  Be  cautious  in  your  ahns-giving,  not  to  perform 
it  before  men,  so  that  ye  may  be  seen  ot  them: 
otherwise,  ye  have  no  reward  from  your  Father 

2  who  is  in  heaven.  (2)  Therefore,  when  thou 
doest  ahns  thou  shalt  not  sound  a  trumpet^  before 
thee,  as  the  hypocrites  do  in  the  synagogues  and 
in  the  streets,  that  they  may  get  praise  from  men. 
Verily  I  say  to  you.  They  have  gotten  their  re- 

3  ward.  (8)  3ut  thou,  when  doine  alms,  let  not 
thy  left  hand  know  what  thy  right  hand  doeth: 

4  (4)  that  thy  alms  may  be  in  secret  And  thy 
Father,  who  seeth  in  secret,  will  reward  thee 
openly. 

5  And  when  thou  prayest,  thou  shalt  not  be  like 
the  hypocrites,  who  are  fond  of  standing  up  in 
the  synagogues  and  at  the  comers  of  streets  to 

►ray,  so  mat  ihej  may  be  seen  by  people.**  Verily 
say  to  you,  They  have  gotten  their  reward 

6  (6)  But  thou,  when  thou  prayest,  enter  into  thy 
closet  and  close  the  door,  and  pray  to  thy  Father 
who  is  in  secret;  and  thy  Father,  who  seeth  in 

7  secret,  will  reward  thee  openly.  (7)  And  when  ye 
pray,  be  not  garrulous*'  like  the  heathen ;  for  they 
expect  to  be  heard  for  their  abundance  of  words. 

•8  (8)  Therefore,  be  not  like  them;  for  your  Father 
knoweth  what  is  needful  for  you,  before  ye  ask 

9  him.^  (9)  In  this  manner,  therefore,  pray  ye: 
Our  Father  who  art  in  heaven,  hallowed  be  thy 

10  name:    (10)  Thy  kingdom  come:   Thy  will«  hd 

11  done;  as  in  heaven,  so  on  earth:    (11)  Give  us 

12  our  needfril  bread,  this  day :  (12)  And  forgive  us 

13  our  debts,  as  we  forgive  our  debtors:  (18)  And 
bring  us  not  into  temptation,  but  deliver  us  from 
evil:  For  thine  is  the  kingdom,  and  the  power,^ 

14  and  the  glory,  for  ever  and  ever:«  Amen.  (14)  For 
if  ye  forgive  men  their  faults,  your  Father  who  is 

15  in  heaven  will  also  forgive  you.  (15)  But  if  ye 
shall  not  forgive  men,  your  Father  also  forgiveth 
not  you  your  &ult8. 

16  And  when  ye  ftst,  be  not  sad  like  the  hypocrites. 
For  they  distort  their  feces,  that  they  may  oe  seen 


•  Sy.  a  ham. 


•*  Sy.  the  sons  of 
men. 


Sy. 


•  OT^pleatvre. 


'  or,  might 

«  fly   V^VvV 


Digitized  by 


Google 


10 


MATTHEW,   VL 


h  or,  ligTu, 
^  OTt  simple. 


k  Sy.  lords. 
1  Sy.  ^JqIqSd 


"*  or,  and, 

*»  or,  superior  to. 


^  or,  t^  trt^ 


8  Sy.  ]v>Vv 


of  men  to  fast    Vgrily  I  say  to  you,  they  have 
gotten  their  reward.    (17)  But,  when  thou  fastest,  17 
wash  thou  thy  face,  and  anoint  thy  head :  (18)  that  18 
thou  mayest  not  be  seen  by  men  as  a  fester,  but  by 
thy  Father  who  is  in  secret :  and  thy  Father  who 
seeth  in  secret,  will  recompense  thee. 

Lay  not  up  for  yourselves  treasures  on  the  earth,  19 
where  moth  and  rust  spoil,  and  where  thieves  dig 
through  and  steal.    (20)  But  lay  up  for  yourselves  20 
treasures  in  heaven,  where  no  moth  and  no  rust 
can  spoil,  and  no  thieves  dig  through  nor  steal. 
(21)  For  where  your  treasure  is,  there  will  your  21 
heart  also  be. 

The  lamp*»  of  the  body  is  the  eye.    If.  therefore  22 
thy  eye  shall  be  sound,*  thy  whole  body  will  be 
luminous.     (23)  But  if  thy  eye  shall  be  diseased,  23 
thy  whole  body  will  be  oarK.    If  then  the  light 
that  is  in  thee  be  darkness,  how  great  will  be  tny 
darkness  I 

No  man  can  serve  two  masters  :^  for  either  he  24 
will  hate  the  one  and  love  the  other,  or  he  will 
honor  the  one  and  neglect  the  other.     Ye  cannot 
serve  God  and  mammon.^*  (25)  Therefore  I  say  to  25 
you:  Be  not  anxious  about  your  life,  what  ye 
shall  eat,  and  what  ye  shall  drink ;  nor  about  your 
body,  how  ye  shall  clothe  yourselves.    Is  not  the 
life  more  important  than  food,  and  the  body  than 
raiment?  (26)  Look  at  the  birds  of  heaven ;  which  26 
sow  not,  and  reap  not,  and  gather  not  into  store- 
houses, but™  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven  feedeth 
them.     Are  not  ye  more  important**  than  they? 
{27)  And  who  of  you  that  shall  be  anxious,  can  add  27 
to  nis  stature  a  cubit?     (28)  And  about  raiment,  28 
why  are  ye  anxious?     Consider  the  lilies  of  the 
desert,  o  in  what  manner  they  grow.    They  toil 
not ;  and  they  spin  not    (29)  i  et  I  say  to  you,  that  29 
not  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory,  was  arrayed? 
like  one  of  them.    (30)  And  if  God  so  clothe  the  30 
grass  of  the '  field,  which  exists  to-day,  and  to- 
morrow falls  into  the  oven,  will  he  not  much  more 
[clothe]  you,  ye  small  in  faith?    (31)  Therefore  81 
be  not  anxious ;  nor  say,  What  shall  we  eat,  or 
what  shall  we  drink,  or  wherewith  be  clothed? 
(82^  For,  all  these  things  the  people'  of  the  world-  82 
sect  after.    And  your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven, 
knoweth  that  all  these  things  are  needftd  to  you. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,    VII. 


11 


33  (88)  But  seek  ye  first  the  kingdom  of  God,  and 
nis  righteousness:   and  all  these  things  shall  be 

84  added  to  you.  (84)  Therefore  be  not  anxious 
about  the  morrow :  for  the  morrow  hath  its  own 
anxieties.    Sufficient  for  the  day,  is  its  owu  eviL 

Vn.    Judge  not,  that  ye  be  not  judged.    (2)  For  with 

2  the  judgment  that  ye  judge,  ye  shall  be  judged; 
and  by  the  measure  that  y.e  measure,  shall  it  be 

3  measured  to  you.  (3)  And  why  observest  thou 
the  straw  in  thy  brother's  eye,  and  regardest  not 

4  the  beam  that  is  in  thine  own  eye  ?  (4)  Or  how 
canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother,  Allow  me  to  pluck 
the  straw  from  thy  eye ;  and  lo  I  a  beam  is  in  thy 

5  own  eye.  (5)  Thou  hypocrite;  pluck  first  the 
beam  from  thy  own  eye ;  and  then  thou  wilt  see 
clearly,  to  pluck  the  straw  out  of  thy  brother's 
eye. 

6  Give  not  a  holy  thing  to  dogs:  and  cast  not 
your  pearls  before  swine;  lest  they  tread  them 
under  their  feet,  and  turn  and  lacerate  you. 

7  Ask,  and  it  shall  be  given  to  you :  seek,  and  ye 
shall  find :  knock,  and  it  shall  be  opened  to  you. 

8  (8)  For,  every  one  that  asketh,  receiveth :  and  he 
that  seeketh,  findeth :  and  to  him  that  knocketh, 

9  it  shall  be  opened.  (9)  For  what  man  is  there 
among  you,  of  whom  if  his  son  ask  bread,  will  he 

10  reach  him  a  stone?    (10)  Or  if  he  ask  of  him  a 

11  fish,  will  he  reach  him  a  serpent?  (11)  If  ye 
then,  who  are  evil,  know  how  to  ^ve  good  gifts 
to  your  children,  how  much  more  will  your  Father 
who  is  in  heaven  give  good  things  to  them  that 
ask  him? 

12  Whatsoever  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to 
you ;  so  also  do  ye  to  them :  for  this  is  the  law* 

18  and  the  prophets.  (18)  Enter  ye  in  by  the  strait 
gate;  for  wide  is  the  ^ate  and  broad  the  way 
which  leadeth  to  destruction  ;*>  and  many  are  they 

14  that  walk  in  it.  (14)  How  small  the  gate  and 
straitened  the  way  that  leadeth  to  life,  and  few 
they  who  find  it ! 

15  Beware  of  false  prophets;  who  come  to  you  in 
the  garb  of  sheep,  but  mtemallv  they  are  rapacious 

16  wolves.  (16)  And  from  their  fruits  ye  shall  know 
them.    Do  men  gather  grapes  from  thorn  bushes; 

17  or  figs  from  thSties?    (17)  So  every  good  tree 


'  Sy.  IrftriVnt 
from  the  Gr. 

VOfJLO^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


12 


MATTHEW,    VMI 


c  Sy.falletk. 
^  or,  pleasure. 


K  or,  streams, 
rivers. 


or,  the  fall. 


k  or,  doctrine. 


•  Sy.  fn  that 

hour. 
»>  Sy. 

UoSao 

c  Sy.  tn  t^ 


]>earetli  good  fruits ;  but  a  bad  tree,  beareth  bad 
IruitB.     (18)  A  good  tree  cannot  bear  bad  fruits;  IS 
nor  can  a  bad  tree  bear  good  fruits.    (19)  Every  19 
tree  that  beareth  not  good  fruits,  is  cut  down  and 
consigned®  to  the  fire.    (20)  Wherefore,  by  their  20 
fruits  ye  shall  know  them. 

Not  whoever  may  say  to  me,  Mv  Lord,  my  21 
Lord,  will  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven :  but 
he  that  doeth  the  wiU*  of  my  Father  who  is  in 
heaven.    (22)  Many  will  say  to  me  in  that  day,  22 
My  Lord,  mj  Lord,  have  we  not  prophesied  in  thy 
name?  and  in  thy  name  cast  out  demons?®  and 
in  thy  name  wrought  many  works^  of  power? 
(28)  And  then  will  I  declare  to  them;  I  never  23 
knew  you.    Depart  from  me,  ye  doers  of  eviL 

Every  one  therefore  that  heareth  these  my  dis-  24 
courses,  and  doeth  them,  will  be  like  to  a  wise 
man,   one    that    built    his    house  upon  a  rock. 
(25)  And  the  rain  descended,   and  the  floods^  26 
came,  and  the  winds**  blew;  and  they  rushed  upon 
that  house ;  and  it  fell  not,  for  its  foundations  were 
laid  upon  a  rock.     (26)  And  every  one  that  hear-  26 
eth  these  my  discourses,  and  doeth  them  not,  will 
be  like  a  foolish  man  that  built  his  house  upon 
sand.    (27)  And  the  rain  descended,  and  the  floods  27 
came,  and  the  winds  blew ;  and  they  rushed  upon 
that  house,  and  it  fell;  and  great  was  the  mini 
of  it. 

And  so  it  was,  that  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  28 
discourses,  the  multitudes  were  astonished  at  his 
teaching:^  (29)  for  he  taught  them  as  one  having  29 
authority;  ana  not  as  their  Scribes  and  Pharisees. 

And  as  he  descended  from  the  mountain,  VIII 
great  multitudes  gathered  around  him.    (2)  And  be-    2 
hold,  a  leper  came  and  worshipped  him,  and  said : 
My  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  make  me  clean.  (8)    8 
And  Jesus  stretched  forth  his  hand,  touched  him, 
^nd  said:  I  will:  be  thou  clean.    And  immediate- 
ly* his  leprosy  was  cleansed.    (4)  And  Jesus  said    4 
to  hirn^  ^e,  thou  tell  no  man :  but  go,  show  thy- 
self to  the  priests,  and  present  an  oblation**  as 
Moses  enjoined,  for  a  testimony  to  them. 

And  when  Jesus  had  entered  into  Capernaum,  6 
a  centurion  came  to  him,  and  besought  him,  (6J  6 
and  said:  My  Lord,  my  child  lietb  at  home,*'  ana 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   VIII. 


13 


7  18  paralytic,  and  badly  afficted,    (7)  Jesus  said  to 

8  him,  I  will  come  and  neal  him.  (8)  The  centurion 
replied,  and  said :  My  Lord,  I  am  not  worthy  that 
thou  shouldst  come  under  my  roof:  but  speak  the 

9  word  only,  and  my  child  will  be  healed.  (9)  For 
I  also  am  a  man  under  authority,  and  there  are 
soldiers  under  my  hands,  and  I  say  to  this  one, 
Go,  and  he  goeth;  and  to  another.  Come,  and  he 
cometh;  and  to  my  seryant.  Do  this  thing,  and  he 

10  doeth  [it].  (10)  And  when  Jesus  heard  [this],  he 
admired  [it] ;  and  he  said  to  those  walkmg  with 
him,  Verily  I  say  to  you,  I  haye  not  found  faith 

11  like  this  eyen  in  Israel.  (11)  And  I  say  to  you, 
that  many  shall  come  from  the  east,  and  from  the 
west,  and  shall  recline  with  Abraham  and  Isaac 

12  and  Jacob,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven;  (12)  but 
the  children  of  the  kingdom  shall  go  forth  into 
the  outer  darkness.     There  will  be  weeping  and 

13  gnashing  of  teeth.  (13)  And  Jesus  said  to  the 
centurion,  Go ;  be  it  to  thee  as  thou  hast  belieyed. 
And  his  child  was  cured  in  that  same  hour.  * 

14  And  Jesus  came  to  the  house  of  Simon, <^  and 
saw  his  wife's  mother  prostrate,  confined  by  a 

16  fever.  (16)  And  he  touched  her  hand,  and  the 
feyer  left  ner:  and  she  arose  and  ministered  to 

16  them.  (16)  And  when  it  was  eyening,  they 
brought  many  demoniacs  before  him ;  ana  he  ex- 
pelled their  demons  by  a  word,  and  healed  all 

17  them  that  were  diseased:  (17^)  that  so  might  be 
fulfilled  that  which  was  spoKen  by  Isaian  the 
proi)het,  who  said :  He  will  bear  our  sorrows,  and 
our  infirmities  he  will  take  upon  him. 

18  And  when  Jesus  saw  great  multitudes  around 
him,  he  ordered  that  they  should  go  to  the  oppo- 

19  site  shore.®  (19)  And  a  Scribe  came  and  said  to 
him:    Eabbi,»  I  will   follow  thee  to    the  place 

20  whither  thou  goest.  (20)  Jesus  said  to  him,  For 
foxes  there  are  holes,  and  for  the  birds  of  heayen 
there  are  nests ;  but  for  the  Son  of  man.  there  is 

21  not  where  he  may  recline  his  head.  (21)  And 
another  of  his  disciples  said  to  him:   Mv  Lord, 

22  suffer  me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father.  (22)  But 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Follow  tnou  me,  and  leaye  the 
dead  to  bury  their  dead. 

23  And  when  Jesus  entered  the  ship,  his  disciples 

24  embarked  with  him.     (24)  And  lo,  a  great  com< 


<*  i.  e.  Simon 
Peter, 


«  Sy.  the  other 
side,  i.  e.  of 
the  lake. 


Sy  ^.aO* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


14 


MATTHEW,   IX. 


^  Sy.  ]jQ^i 

*   Sy.  place  of 
graves. 


k  Sy.fell. 
*   Sy.  died. 


a  Sy.  //i6  easy. 


motion  arose  in  the  sea,  so  that  the  vessel  was 
covered  hy  the  waves.     But  Jesus  was  asleep: 

(25)  and  his  disciples  came  to  awake  hyn,  and  said  26 
to  nim:  Our  Lord,  deliver  us;  we  are  perishing  1 

(26)  Jesus  said  to  them,  Why  are  ye  afraid,  ye  26 
small  in  faith!    Then  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the 
wind  and  the  sea;  and  there  was  great  tranquillity. 

(27)  And  the  men  were  amazed;  and  they  said,  27 
What  a  man  is  this,  to  whom  the  winds  and  the 
sea  are  obedient ! 

And  when  Jesus  arrived  at  the  farther  shore,  in  28 
the  country  of  the  Gadarenes,»  there  met  him  two 
demoniacs,**  who  came  out  from  the  sepulchres,* 
very  furious,  so  that  no  one  could  pass  that  way. 

(29)  And  they  cried  out,  and  said:  What  have  we  29 
to  do  with  thee  ?  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  God.    Hast 
thou  come  hither  before  the  time  to  torment  us? 

(30)  And  at  a  distance  from  them  there  was  a  herd  30 
of  many  swine  feeding.     (31)  And  the  demons  31 
entreated  of  him,  and  said :  If  thou  cast  us  out, 
suffer  us  to  go  into  the  herd  of  swine.    (32)  And  32 
Jesus  said  to  them.  Go  ye.    And  immediately  they 
came  out,  and  entered  into  the  swine;  and  that 
whole  herd  ran  straight  to  a  precipice,  and  plunged^ 
into  the  sea,  and  perished*  in  the  waters.     (33)  33 
And  the  herdsmen  fled,  and  entered  the  city,  and 
related  all  that  had  occurred,  and  concerning  the 
demoniacs.    (34)   And  all  the  city  came  out  to  84 
meet  Jesus:  and  when  they  saw  him,  they  be- 
sought him  to  retire  from  their  coasts. 

And  he  entered  the  ship,  and  passed  over  and  IX. 
came  to  his  own  city.    (2)  And  they  brought  to    2 
him  a  paralytic,  lying  on  a  bed.    And  Jesus  saw 
their  faith,  and  said  to  the  paralytic:  Take  cour- 
age, my  SOD ;  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.    (3)  And    3 
some  of  the  Scribes  said  in  their  minds.  This  man 
blasphemeth.    (4)  But  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts :     4 
and  he  said  to  them,  Why  do  ye  think  evil  [things] 
in  your  heart?    (5)  For,  which  is  the  easier, ^  to    5 
say,  Thv  sins  are  forgiven  thee;  or  to  say.  Arise 
and  walk?    (6)  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the    6 
Son  of  man  hath  authority  on  earth  to  forgive 
sins,  he  said  to  the  paralytic :  Arise,  take  up  thy 
bed,  and  go  to  thy  home.     (7)  And  he  arose  and    7 
went  to  Ms  home.     (8)  And  when  the  multitudes    8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   IX. 


15 


saw  [it],  they  were  struck  with  awe;  and  they 
praised  God,  who  had  given  authority  like  this  to 
men. 
9  And  83  Jesus  passed  on  from  there,  he  saw  a 
man  sitting  at  the  custom-house,  whose  name  was 
Matthew.**    And  he  said  to  him.  Follow  me :  and 

10  he  arose  and  followed  him.  (10)*  And  as  they 
were  reclining  in  a  house,  many  publicans  and 
sinners  came  and  reclined  with  Jesus  and  his  dis- 

11  ciples.  (11)  And  when  the  Pharisees  saw  [it], 
they  said  to  his  disciples.  Why  doth  your  Rabbi* 

12  eat  with  publicans  and  sinners?  (12)  And  as 
Jesus  heard  [it],  he  said  to  them :  They  who  are 
in  health  have  no  need  of  a  physician,  but  they 

13  that  are  very  sick.  (13)  Go  and  learn  what  that 
is :  I  require  compassion,  and  not  a  sacrifice !  For 
I  did  not  come  to  call  the  righteous,  but  the  sinful. 

14  Then  came  to  him  the  disciples  of  John,<^  and 
said:  Why  do  we  and  the  Pharisees  fast  much, 

15  and  thy  disciples  fast  not?  (15)  Jesus  said  to 
them :  Can  the  children®  of  the  nuptial  chamber 
fast,  so  long  as  the  bridegroom  is  witn  them?  But 
the  days  will  come  when  the  bridegroom  will  be 

16  taken  from  them,  and  then  they  will  fast  (16)  No 
one  inserteth  a  piece  of  new  cloth  on  an  old  gar* 
ment;   lest  that  which  fiUeth  up,  tear  from  that 

17  garment,  and  the  rent  become  greater.  (17)  And 
thev  do  not  put  new  wine  into  old  sacks ;  lest  the 
sacks  burst,  and  the  wine  run  out,  and  the  sacks 
perish.  But  thev  put  new  wine  into  new  sacks; 
and  they  are  both  preserved. 

18  And  while  he  was  thus  discoursing  with  them, 
a  certain  ruler^  came,  drew  near,  worshipped  him, 
and  said :  My  daughter  is  already  dead,  but  come, 

19  lay  thy  hana  upon  her,  and  she  will  live.  (19) 
And  tJesus  rose  up,  and  his  disciples;  and  they 

20  followed  him.  (20)  And  behold,  a  woman  whose 
blood  had  flowed  fourteen  years,  came  up  behind 

21  him,  and  touched  the  extremity  of  his  robe:  (21) 
for  she  had  said  in  her  mind.  If  I  but  touch  his 

22  garment  I  shall  be  cured.  (22)  And  Jesus  turned 
himself  looked  at  her,  and  said  to  her:  Take 
courage,  my  daughter;  thy  faith  hath  given  thee 
life.«     And  the  woman  was  cured  from  that  very 

2S  hour.  (28)  And  Jesus  came  to  the  house  of  the 
ruler:   and  he  saw  there  pipers,  and  multitudes 


»•  Sy.  ^ASo 


•  Sy.  ,aao5 


Sy. 
*  or,  guests. 


Sy.  UiSil 

Gr.  ap^biv. 


«  Sy.  hath  vivi- 
Jied  thee. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


16 


MATTHEW,  X. 


By.  ](X^j 


•Sy. 
»>Sy. 

dSy. 


making  outcry.    (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Beiire ;  24 
for  the  maid  is  not  dead,  bat  sleepeth.    And  they 
scofifed  at  him.    (25)  And  when  he  had  ejected  25 
the  throngs,  he  entered  in,  and  took  her  by  the 
hand,  and  the  maid  rose  up.    (26)  And  the  &me  26 
of  this  [thin^  spread  in  all  that  land. 

And  when  Jesus  had  passed  from  there,  two  27 
blind  men  followed  after  him,  and  said:   Have 
mercy  on  us,  Thou  Son  of  David!     (28)  And  28 
when  he  had  entered  a  house,  those  blind  men  ap- 
proached him,  and  Jesus  said  to  them :  Believe  ye 
that  I  am  able  to  do  this?    They  said  to  him.  Yea 
our  Lord.    (29)  Then  he  touched  their  eyes,  and  29 
said :  As  ye  have  believed,  so  shall  it  be  to  you. 
(80)  And  forthwith  their  eyes  were  opened.    And  80 
Jesus  charged  them  and  said:  See,  that  no  man 
know  [of  iy.    (81)  But  they  went  out  and  spread  31 
the  fame  of  it  in  an  that  land. 

And  as  Jesus  went  out,  they  brought  to  him  a  82 
dumb  man  in  whom  was  a  demon.**    (88)  And  88 
when  the  demon  had  gone  out,  the  dumo  man 
conversed.     And   the   multitudes   admired,   and 
said:  Never  was  it  so  seen  in  Israel!    (84)  But  84 
the  Pharisees  said :  It  is  by  the  Prince  of  demons, 
he  casteth  out  demons. 

And  Jesus  travelled  over  all  the  cities  and  the  86 
villages:  and  he  taught  in  their  synagogues,  and 
proclaimed  the  tidings  of  the  Idngdom,  and  healed 
all  diseases  and  all  pains.    (86)  And  when  Jesus  86 
looked  on  the  multitudes,  he  pitied  them ;  because 
they  were  wearied  and  dispersed,  like  sheep  that 
have  no  shepherd.    (87)  And  he  said  to  his  -dis-  87 
ciples,  The  harvest  is  great  and  the  laborers  few. 
(88)  Entreat,  therefore,  of  tne  Lord  of  the  harvest,  88 
that  he  would  send  laborers  into  his  harvest. 

And  he  called  his  twelve  disciples^  [to  him],  X. 
and  gave  them  authority  over  unclean  spirits^  to 
cast  them  out,  and  to  heal  every  pain  ana  disease. 
(2)  And  the  names  of  those  twelve  Legates®  are    2 
these:  The  first  of  them,d  Simon  who  is  called 
Cephas,  and  Andrew  his  brother;  and  James  the 
son  of  Zebedee,  and  John  his  brother;  (8)  and    8 
Philip,  and  Bartholomew,  and  Thomas,  and  Mat- 
thew the  publican;  and  James  the  son  of  Alpheus, 
and  Lebbeus  who  was  called  Thaddeus;  (4)  and    4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   X. 


17 


Simon  the  Canaanite,  and  Judas  Iscariot,^  he  who 

5  betrayed  him.  (5)  These  twelve  Jesus  sent  forth : 
and  he  commanded  them  and  said :  Go  not  in  the 
way  of  the  Gentiles:^  and  enter  not  the  cities  of 

6  the  Samaritans.    (6)  But,  go  ye  rather  to  the  lost 

7  sheep  of  the  house  of  Israel.  (7)  And  as  ye  go, 
proclaim  and  say :  The  kingdom  of  heaven  hath 

8  approached.  (8)  Heal  ye  the  sick;  cleanse  the 
leprous;  [raise  the  dead;]ir  and  cast  out  demons. 

9  Freely  ye  have  received;  freely  give.    (9)  Provide 
.0  not  gold,  nor  mlvftT,  nor  brass  m  your  purses;  (10) 

nor  a  wallet  for  the  journey:  neither  two  coats, 


11 

12 
13 


nor  shoes,  nor  a  staflf.  For  the  laborer  is  worthy 
of  his  fooid.  ^11)  And  into  whatever  city  or  town 
ye  enter,  inquire,  who  in  it  is  worthy ;  and  there 
stay  imtil  ye  depart  (12J  And  when  ye  enter  a 
house,  salute**  the  housenold.  (18)  And  if  the 
house  be  worthy,  your  peace>  will  come  upon  it; 
but  if  it  be  not  worthy,  your  peace  will  return 
14  uj>on  yourselves.  (14)  And  whoever  will  not  re- 
ceive you,  nor  hear  your  discourses,  when  ye  de- 
5 art  ^om  that  house  or  that  town,  shake  off  the 
ust  from  your  feet  (15)  Verily  I  say  to  you, 
that  it  will  be  comfortable  for  the  land  of  Sodom 
and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than 
for  that  cily. 

16  Behold,  1  send  you  forth  as  sheep  among  wolves. 
Therefore  be  ye  sagacious  as  serpents,  and  guile- 

17  less  as  doves.  (17)  And  beware  of  men;  for  thev 
will  deliver  jrou  over  to  the  tribunals,  and  will 

18  scourge  you  m  their  synagogues.  (18)  And  they 
will  bring  you  before  governors^  and  kings,  on 
my  account,  for  a  testimonv  to  them  and  to  the 

19  Gentiles.  (19)  And  when  they  deliver  you  up,  be 
not  anxious  how  or  what  ye  shall  speak;  for  it 

20  shall  be  given  you  in  that  hour  what  to  say.  (20) 
For  it  is  not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  spirit  of  your 
Father  speaking  in  you.  (21)  And  brother  shidl 
deliver  up  his  brother  to  death,  and  a  fether  his 
son;  and  children  shall  rise  up  a^nst  parents, 
and  cause  them  to  die.  (22)  Ana  ye  shall  be 
hated  by  every  one,  on  account  of  my  name.  But 
he  that  shall  endure  to  the  end,  shall  have  Ufe. 

28  ^8)  And  when  they  persecute  you  in  one^  city, 
flee  to  another :  for  veril  v  I  saj  to  you.  Ye  shall 
not  have  completed  all  the  cities  of  the  house  of  | 


21 


22 


•  Sy.  l;oau 

Sy.  the  prO' 
fane. 


'Omitted  in 
most  cojpiea. 


Sy.aekifier 
Oiepeaeeqfit 


L  e.  your  m- 
lanit  oPsah^ 
tation. 


Sy. 

Gr.  ify$iiM»m{ 


8jr. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


18 


MATTHEW,   X 


"'  or,  members. 


•  Sy.  ^fiol, 
Gr.  d(f(fapiov. 


PSy.  to  cast,  or, 
disseminate, 

»■  Sy.  a  sword. 

0  Sy.  to  divide, 

'  Sy.  children 
nfhis  house. 


▼  Sj.  Jlndeth. 


Israel,  till  the  Son  of  man  shall  come.    (24)  No  24 
disciple  is  better  than  his  rabbi;   nor  a  servant, 
than  his  lord.     (25)     It  is  sufficient  for  the  dis-  25 
ciple,  that  he  be  as  his  rabbi;   and  the   servant, 
as  his  lord.     If  they  call  the  lord  of  the  house 
Beelzebub   how  much  more   the   children™  of  his 
family?     (26)  Therefore  be  not  afraid  of  them;  26 
for  there  is  nothing  covered  up,  that  shall  not  be 
exposed;    nor    concealed,  that   shall    not    become 
known.    (27)  Whatever  I  say  to  you  in  the  dark,  27 
that   speak  ye  in  ^e  light;   and  what  ye  have 
heard  in  your  ears,  proclaim  ye  on  the  housetops. 

(28)  And  be  not  afraid  of  them  that  kill  the  body,  28 
but  cannot  kill  the  soul ;  but  be  afraid  rather  of 
Him  who  can  destroy  both  soul  and  body  in  hell.** 

(29)  Are  not  two  sparrows  sold  for  a  farthing  ?«  29 
Yet  one  of  them  doth  not  fall  to  the  ground  with- 
out your  Father.    (30)  As  for  you,  even  the  hairs  30 
of  your  head  are  all  numbered.    (31)  Therefore  be  31 
not  afraid:   ye  are  more  important  than  many 
sparrows.    (32)  Wherefore,  wnoever  shall  confei  32 
me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  confess  before  my 
Father  who  is  in  heaven.    (33)  But  whoever  shall  88 
deny  me  before  men,  him  will  I  also  deny  before 
my  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

Think  not  that  I  have  come  to  sow?  quietness  84 
on  the  earth:  I  have  not  come  to  sow  quietness, 
but  conflict.'^    (35)  For  I  have  come  to  set"  a  man  35 
against  his  father,  and  a  daughter  against  her 
mother,  and  a  daughter-in-law  against  her  mother- 
in-law.    (36)  And  a  man's  foes  will  be  the  mem-  36 
bers  of  his  household.*    (37)  He  that  loveth  father  87 
or  mother  more  than  me,  id  not  worthy  of  me: 
and  he  that  loveth  son  or  daughter  more  than  me, 
is  not  worthy  of  me :  (38)  and  he  that  doth  not  38 
bear  his  cross  and  follow  after  me,  is  not  worthy 
of  me.    (39)  He  that  preserveth^  his  life,  shall  lose  89 
it:  and  he  that  loseth  his  life  for  my  sake,  shall 
preserve  it.    (40)  He  that  entertainetn  you,  ent^-  40 
taineth  me:  and  he  that  entertaineth  me,  enter- 
taineth  him  that  sent  me.    (41)  He  that  entertain-  41 
eth  a  prophet  in  the  name  of  a  prophet,  shall  re- 
ceive a  prophet's  reward :  and  he  that  entertaineth 
a  riffhteous  man  in  the  name  of  a  righteous  man, 
shall  receive  a  righteous  man's  reward.    (42)  And  42 
whoever  shall  give  one  of  these  littie  ones  to  drink 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XL 


19 


a  cup  of  cold  [water]  only,  in  the  name  of  a  dis- 
ciple, verily  I  say  to  you,  he  shall  not  lose  his 
Xl.reward.    (aI.)  And  when  Jesus  had  ended  the 

instructions*  to  his  twelve  disciples,  he  went  from  •  sy.  commands 
there,  to  teach  and  to  proclaim  m  their  cities.  or,  precepts. 

2  Kow  when  John,  in  the  house  of  prisoners, 
heard  of  the  works  of  Messiah,  he  sent  by  the  hand 

3  of  his  disciples,  (8)  and  said  to  him :  Art  thou  he 

4  that  Cometh,  or  are  we  to  expect  another  ?  (4)  Jesus 
answered,  and  said  to  them:   Gb,  tell  John  the 

5  things  that  ye  hear  and  see:  (5)  the  blind  see,  and 
the  lame  walk,  and  the  leprous  are  cleansed,  and 
ike  deaf  hear,  and  the  dead  rise  up,  and  the  needy 

6  hear  good  tidings :  (6)  and  happy  is  he,  who  shall 

7  not  be  stumbled  at  me.  (7)  Ana  when  they  were 
gone,  Jesus  began  to  say  to  the  multitudes,  con- 
cerning John :  What  went  ye  into  the  wilderness 

8  to  see  r     A  reed  that  waved  in  the  wind  ?*>    (8)  *•  Sy.  |mO} 
And  if  not;  what  went  ye  out  to  see?    A  man 
clothed  in  delicate  robes?      Lo,   they  that  are 
clothed  in  delicate  [robes],  are  in  the  dwelling*  of  •  Sy.  haum. 

9  kings.  (9)  And  if  not;  what  went  ye  out  to  see? 
A  prophet?    Yes,  say  I  to  you,  and  more  than  a 

10  prophet.    (10)  For  t&is  is  he  of  whom  it  is  writ- 
ten :  Behold,  I  send  my  messenger^*  before  thy  *  Sy.  ^^^^^ 
face,  that  he  may  prepare  the  way  before  thee. 

11  (11)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  Among  those  bom  of 
women,  there  hatlT  not  arisen  a  greater  than  John 
the  Baptizer:  yet  the  small  one  in  the  kingdom 

12  of  heaven,  is  greater  than  he.  (12)  And  from  the 
days  of  John  the  Baptizer,  until  now,  the  kingdom 
of  heaven  is  assailed  by  force,  and  the  violent 

13  seize  it    (18)  For  all  the  prophets  and  the  law«  •  Sy.  lA-5ol, 

14  prophesied,  until  the  time  of  John.     (14)  AnS^W  the  Pentateuch 
ye  are  willing,  receive  ye,  that  this  is  he  who  was 

15  to  come.  (15)  He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him 
hear! 

16  But  to  what  shall  I  compare  this  generation? 
It  is  like  to  children,  that  sit  in  the  market-place 

17  and  call  to  their  associates,  (17)  and  say:  We  nave 
sung  to  you,  and  ye  did  not  dance:  we  have  wailed 

18  to  you,  and  ye  did  not  lament.  (18)  For  John 
came,  not  eating  and  not  drinking ;  and  they  said, 

19  He  hath  a  demon.^    (19)  The  Son  of  man  came,  t  Sy.  ]cu} 
eating  and  drinking;   and  they  say:   Behold,  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


20 


MATTHEW,   XII. 


'Sjr.  ^QjLA 


gluttonous  man,  and  a  wine  drinker,  and  a  friend 
of  publicans  and  sinners.  But  wisdom  is  justified 
by  her  works. 

Then  began  Jesus  to  reproach  the  cities,  in  20 
which  his  many  deeds  of  power  were  wrought, 
yet  they  repented  not    (21)  And  he  said:  Woe  to  21 
thee,  Chorazin  I     Woe  to  thee,  Bethsaida !     For  if 
the  deeds  of  power  done  in  you,  had  been  done  in 
Tyre  and  Sidon,  doubtless,  they  would  long  ago 
have  repented  in  sackcloth  and  ashes.    (22)  But  I  22 
say  to  you.  It  will  be  comfortable  for  Tyre  and 
Sidon,  in  the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than  for 
you.    (28)  And  thou,  Capernaum,  which  hast  been  23 
lifted  up  to  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down  to  the 
ffrave.8f     For  if  those  deeds  of  power  which  were 
done  in  thee,  had  been  done  in  Sodom,  it  would 
have  stood  to  this  day.    (24)  But  I  say  to  thee,  24 
It  will  be  comfortable  for  the  land  of  Sodom,  in 
the  day  of  judgment,  rather  than  for  thee. 

At  that  time  Jesus  answered  and  said :  I  praise  25 
thee,  O  my  Father,  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth,  that 
thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and  know- 
ing, and  hast  revealed  them  to  little  children.   (26)  26 
Yes,  my  Father;  for  so  it  seemed  good  before  thee. 

(27)  Every  thing  is  given  up  by  my  Father  to  me.  27 
And  no  one  knoweth  the  Son,  except  the  Father. 
Also,  no  one  knoweth  the  Father,  except  the  Son, 
and  he  to  whom  the  Son  is  pleased  to  reveal  [him]. 

(28)  Come  unto  me,  all  ye  wd&ried  and  heavily  28 
burdened,  and  I  will  ease  you.     (29)  Take  my  29 
yoke  upon  you,*^  and  learn  from  me,  that  I  am 
gentle  and  subdued  in  my  heart:,  and  ye  will  find 
rest  for  your  souls :  (30)  for  my  yoke  is  pleasant,  30 
and  my  burden  is  light 


'  Sy.  plae$  cf 


At  that  time  Jesus,  on  the  sabbath,  walked  XIL 
in  the  tillage  grounds:*    and  his  disciples  were 
hungry,  and  began  to  pluck  the  ears  and  to  eat 
(2)  And  when  the  Pharisees  saw  them,  they  said    2 
to  him :  See ;  thy  disciples  are  doing  that  which 
it  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath.     (3)  Bat  ho    8 
said  to  them,  Have  ye  not  read  what  David  did 
when  he  was  hungry,  and  they  that  were  with 
him  ?    (4)  How  he  went  to  the  house  of  God,  and    4 
ate  the  bread  of  the  Lord's  table ;  which  it  was 
not  lawful  for  him  to  eat  nor  for  them  that  were 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHRW,    XII. 


21 


5  with  him,  but  solely  for  the  priests?    (5)  Or  have 
ye  not  read  m  the  law,^  how  that  in  tne  temple  ''Sy.^^^Jol^ 
the  priests  profane  the  sabbath,  and  are  without    inthePenta^ 

6  fault?     (6)  ^ut  I  say  to  you,  that  a  creater  dian    tmch. 

7  the  temple  is  here.  (7)  And  if  ye  had  known 
what  that  is,  I  desire  mercy,  and  not  sacrifice; 
ye  would  not  have  criminated  them  who  are  with- 

8  out  fiiult  (8)  For  the  Son  of  man,  is  lord  of  the 
sabbath. 

9  And  Jesus  went  from  there,  and  came  to  their 

10  synagogue.  (10)  And  a  man  was  there,  whose 
hand  was  withered.  And  they  questioned  him, 
and  said,  Is  it  lawful  to  heal  on  the  sabballi  ?  that 

11  they  imght  defame  him.  (11)  And  he  said  to 
them,  What  man  among  you  is  there,  who,  if  he 
have  a  sheep,  and  it  fall  into  a  pit  on  the  day  of 
the  sabbath,  doth  not  lay  hold  of  it  and  lift  it  oUt? 

12  (12)  Now,  how  much  better  is  a  human  beings  than  «  Sy.  a  loii  qf 
a  sheep!     Wherefore  it  is  lawful  to  do  what  is 

18  good,  on  the  sabbath.  (18)  Then  said  he  to  the 
man,  Stretch  forth  thy  hand.  And  he  stretched 
out  his  hand;   and  it  was  restored,  and  like  the 

14  other.^J    (14)  And   the  Pharisees  went  out    and  *  Sy.  iufiOom 
held  a  consultation  against  him,  that  they  might 
destroy  him. 

15  But  Jesus  knew  fit] ;  and  he  retired  from  there 
And  great  multitudes  followed  him :  and  he  cured 

16  them  all.    (16)  And  he  charged  them  not  to  make 

17  him  known:   (17)  that  what  was  spoken  by  the 

18  prophet  Isaiah  might  be  fulfilled,  saymg:  (18)  Be- 
nold  my  servant,  in  whom  I  have  complacency ; 
my  beloved,  in  whom  my  soul  delightetn.  I  will 
put  my  spirit  upon  him ;  and  he  shall  proclaim 

19  judgment  to  the  Gentiles.  (19)  He  shall  not  con- 
tend, nor  be  clamorous,  nor  shall  any  one  hear  his 

20  voice  in  the  market-place.«  (20)  The  crushed 
reed  he  will  not  break ;  and  the  flickering  lamp  he 
will  not  extinguish ;  until  he  bring  judgment^  to 

21  be  victorious.ir  (21)  And  in  his  name  shall  the 
Oentiles  trust.  k  Sy.  to  a  vie 

22  Then  they  brought  to  him  a  demoniac  that  was     tary. 
dumb  and  blind ;  and  he  healed  him,  so  that  the 

28  dumb  and  blind  man  both  talked  and  saw.  (28) 
And  all  the  multitude  were  amazed,  and  said :  Is 

24  not  this  the  son  of  David?  (24)  But  when  the 
Pharisees  heard  [it],  they  said :  This  man  doth  not 


•  or,  pubHe 

streeL 

juMtioi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,    XIL 


h  Sy.  scaUenth 
to  scatter. 


ay  ]tu^\v 


^  or,  useless. 


-Sy.Ul 
»  Sy.  ^Q-i 


cast  out  demons,  except  by  Beelzebub  the  prinoe 
of  demons.    (25)  And  Jesus  knew  their  thoughts,  26 
and  said  to  them :  Every  kingdom  that  is  divided 
against  itself,   will  become  desolate;   and  every 
house  or  city  which  is  divided  against  itself  will 
not  stand.    (26)  Now  if  Satan  cast  out  Satan,  he  26 
is  divided  against  himself;  how  then  doth  his  king- 
dom stand?    (27)  And  if  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  27 
demons,  by  whom  do  your  children  cast  them  out? 
Wherefore  they  will  be  your  judges.     (28)  But  if  28 
I  by  the  Spirit  of  God  cast  out  demons,  the  king- 
dom of  God  hath  come  near  to  you.     (29)  Or  how  29 
can  oiie  enter  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  and  plun- 
der his  goods,  unless  he  first  bind  the  strong  man? 
and  then  he  may  plunder  his  house.     (30)  He  that  80 
is  not  with  me,  is  against  me ;  and  he  that  gather- 
eth  not  with  me  actually  scattereth.**    (81)  There-  31 
fore  I  say  to  you,  that  all  sins  and  contumelies 
shall  be  forgiven  to  men ;  but  the  contumely  which 
is  against  the  Spirit,  shall  not  be  forgiven  to  men. 
(82)  And  whoever  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  32 
Son  of  man,  it  will  be  forgiven  him :  but  whoever 
shall  speak  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  not  be 
forgiven  him; — ruot  in  this  world,*  and  not  in  the 
world  to  come.     (33)  Either  make  the  tree  good, 
and  its  fruits  good ;  or  make  the  tree  bad,  and  its 
fruits  bad :  for  a  tree  is  known  bv  its  fruits.     (34) 
Ofl&pring  of  vipers,  how  can  ye  who  are  evil,  speak 
gooa  things  ?    For  out  of  the  fullnesses  of  the  heart 
the  mouth  speaketh.     (35)  A  good  man  out  of  good  35 
treasures  brmgeth  forth  good  things,  and  a  bad  man 
out  of  bad  treasures  bringeth  forth  bad  things. 
(36)  For  I  say  to  you,  That  for  every  idle^  word  36 
that  men  shall  speak,  they  shall  give  account  of  it 
in  the  day  of  judgment.     (37)  For  by  thy  words  37 
thou  shalt  be  justified;   and  by  thy  words  thou 
shalt  be  condemned. 

Then  answered  some  of  the  Scribes  and  of  the  8P 
Pharisees,  and  said  to  him:  Teacher, ^  we  wish  to 
see  from  thee  a  sign."*     (39)  But  he  replied  and  8i 
said  to  them :  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation 
demandeth  a  sign :  but  a  sign  will  not  be  given  to 
it,  unless  it  be  the  sign  of  Jonah"  the  prophet 
(40)  For  as  Jonah  was  in  the  belly  of  the  nsh  three  40 
days  and  three  nights;  so  will  the  Son  of  man  be 
in  the  heart  of  tne  earth  three  days  and  three 


88 


34 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,  XIIL 


23 


41  nights.  (41)  The  people  of  Nineveh  will  stand  up 
in  the  judgment  against  this  generation,  and  wifi 
condemn  it :  fur  they  repented  at  the  preaching  of 
Jonah;    and   lo,   a  greater  than   Jonah  is  here. 

42  (42)  The  queen  of  the  south**  will  stand  up  in  the 
judgment  against  this  generation,  and  will  con- 
demn it  :  for  she  came  from  the  extremities?  of  the 
earth  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon ;  and  lo,  a 

43  superior  to  Solomon  is  here.  (48)  And  when  an 
unclean  spirit  goeth  out  of  a  man,  it  wandereth  in 
places  where  is  no  water,  and  seeketh  comfort  and 

4r4  nndeth  [it]  not  (44)  Then  it  saith :  I  will  return 
to  my  house,  from  which  I  came  out.  And  it 
Cometh,  and  findeth  it  vacated,  and  swept  clean, 

45  and  set  in  order.  (45)  So  it  goeth  and  taketh 
with  it  seven  other  spirits,  worse  than  itself  and 
they  enter  and  dwell  in  it;  and  the  end  of  that 
man  is  worse  than  his  beginning.  So  will  it  be  to 
this  evil  generation. 

46  And  while  he  was  discoursing  to  the  multitudes, 
his  mother  and  his  brothers  came  and  stood  with- 

47  out,  and  sought  to  speak  with  him.  (47)  And  a 
person  said  to  him:  Lo,  thy  mother  and  thy 
brothers  stand  without,  and  seek  to  speak  with 

48  thee.  (48J  But  he  replied,  and  said  to  him  that 
informed  nim:  Who  is  my  mother?  and  who  are 

4^  my  brothers?  (49)  And  he  stretched  forth  his 
hand  towards  his  disciples,  and  said :  Behold  my 

50  mother,  and  behold  my  brothers  I  (50)  For  every 
one  that  doeth  the  good  pleasure  of  my  Father  who 
is  in  heaven,  that  person  is  my  brother,  and  my 
sister,  and  my  mother. 

XITT.  And  on  that  dav  Jesus  went  out  of  the  house, 
2  ftnd  sat  by  the  side  of  the  sea.  (2)  And  great 
multitudes  assembled  around  him;  so  that  he 
embarked  and  seated  himself  in  a  ship,  and  all  the 
8  multitude  stood  on  the  shore  of  the  sea.  (8)  And 
he  discoursed  with  them  much,  by  similitudes.* 
And  he  said,  Behol^  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow. 

4  (4)  And  as  hf^scTwed,  some  [seed]  fell  upon  the 
side  of  a  path :  and  a  bird  came  and  devoured  it 

5  (5)  And  other  [seed]  fell  upon  a  rock,  so  that  it 
had  not  much  soil:  and  it  sprung  up  forthwith, 

6  because  there  was  no  depth  of  earth.    (6)  But 
when  the  sun  was  up  it  wilted.     And,  because  it 


Sy.  liioii 


^  or,  parables. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


24 


MATTHEW,   XIIL 


^  OT^pmrMes. 


^  mr^be  turned; 
OT^  Htm  ihenir 


*  Sy.  temporary. 


•Sy. 


^kod  root,  it  dried  up.    (7)  And  other  [seed]  fell    7 
among  thorns :  and  the  thorns  shot  up,  and  choked 
it     {8)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  good  ground ;  and    8 
bore  miits,  some  a  hundredfold,  some  sixtyfold, 
and  some  thirtyfold.    (9)  He  that  hath  ears  to    9 
hear,  let  him  hear. 

And  his  disciples  came  and  said  to  him,  Why  10 
discoursest  thou  to  them  in  similitudes?**   (11)  And  11 
he  answered,  and  said  to  them :  Because,  to  you  it 
is  given  to  know  the  mysteries  of  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  but  to  them  it  is  not  given.     (12)  For  to  12 
him  that  hath,  shall  be  given;  and  he  shall  abound: 
but  from  him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he  hath 
shall  be  taken  from  him.     (13)  For  this  cause  I  13 
discourse  to  them  in  similitudes,  because  they  see 
and  do  not  see,  and  they  hear  and  do  not  hear,  nor 
understand.    (14)   And  in  them  is  fulfilled  the  14 
prophecy  of  Isiaiah,  who  said :  By  hearing  ye  shall 
near,  and  shall  not  understand ;  and  by  seeing  ye 
see,  and  shall  not  know:  (15)  For  the  heart  of  this  15 
people  hath  grown  fat,  and  with  their  ears  thev 
have  heard  heavily,  and  their  eyes  they  have  closed ; 
lest  they  should  see  with  their  eyes,  and  should 
hear  with  their  ears,  and  should  understand  with 
their  heart,  and  should  tum;<^  aod  I  should  heal 
them.    ri6)  But  happy  are  your  eyes,  for  they  16 
see ;  ana  your  ears,  for  they  hear.    (17)  For  verily  17 
'.  say  to  you,  That  many  prophets  and  righteous 
men]  longed  to  see  what  ye  see,  and  did  not  see 
it];  and  to  hear  what  ye  hear,  and  did  not  hear 
.it].     (18)  But  hear  ye  the  similitude  of  the  seed.  18 
l9)  Every  one  that  heareth  the  word  of  the  king-  19 
dom,  and  understandeth  it  not,  the  evil  one  comem 
and  snatcheth  away  the  seed  sowed  in  his  heart: 
this  is  what  was  sowed  by  the  side  of  the  path. 
(20)  And  that  Which  was  sowed  on  the  rock,  is  he  20 
that  heareth  the  word,  and  at  once  receiveth  it 
with  joy.    (21)  Yet  hath  he  no  root  in  him,  but  is  21 
of  short  duration  ;^  and  when  there  is  trouble  or 
persecution  on  account  of  the  word,  he  soon  stum- 
bleth.    (22)  And  that  which  was  sowed '  among  22 
thorns,  is  he  that  heareth  the  word ;  and  care  for 
this  world®  and  the  deceptiveness  of  riches,  choke 
the  word ;  and  he  is  without  fruits.     (23)  But  that  23 
which  was  sowed  on  good  ground,   is  he  that 
heareth  my  word,  and  understandeth,  and  beareth 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XIIL 


25 


24 
26 

26 
27 


29 
SO 


31 


32 


33 


34 


35 


36 


87 

S8 


fruits,  and  jieldeth,  some  a  hundredfold,  some  six- 
tjrfold,  and  some  thirtyfold. 

Another  similitude  he  proposed^  to  them,  and 
said:  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a  man  who 
sowed  good  seed  in  his  field.  (25)  And  while 
people  were  asleep,  his  enemy  came  and  sowed  tares 
among  the  wheat,  and  went  away.  (26)  And 
when  the  plant  shot  up  and  bore  mdts,  then  ap- 
peared also  the  tares.  (27)  And  the  servants  of 
the  householders:  came,  and  said  to  him.  Our  lord, 
didst  thou  not  sow  good  seed  in  thy  field?  From 
whence  are  the  tares  in  it  (28)  And  he  said  to 
them.  An  enemjr  hath  done  this.  The  servants 
said  to  him,  Is  it  thy  pleasure  that  we  go  and 
gather  them  out?  (29)  And  he  said  to  them, 
[No,]  lest,  while  ye  gatner  out  the  tares,  ye  also 
eradicate  the  wheat  with  them.  (30)  Let  them 
both  grow  together  until  the  harvest ;  and  at  the 
time  of  harvest,  I  will  say  to  the  reapers.  Gather 
out  first  the  tares,  and  bind  them  in  bundles  to  be 
burned;  but  the  wheat  gather  ye  into  my  granary. 
(31)  Another  similitude  proposed  he  to  them, 
and  said:  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  a 
kernel  of  mustard  seed,  which  a  man  took  and 
sowed  in  his  field.  (32)  And  this  is  the  least  of 
all  seeds ;  but  when  it  is  ffrown,  it  is  greater  than 
all  the  herbs,  and  becometh  a  tree,  so  that  a  bird 
of  heaven  may  come  and  nestle  in  its  branches. 
(33)  Another  similitude  spake  he  to  them.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  the  leaven,  which  a 
woman  took  and  buried  in  three  measures^  of  meal, 
until  the  whole  fermented.  (34)  All  these  things 
Jesus  discoursed  to  the  multitude  in  similitudes  ;i 
and  without  similitudes  he  did  not  discourse  with 
them.  (35)  That  so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which 
was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  who  said :  I  will  open 
my  mouth  in  similitudes ;  I  will  utter^  things  con- 
cealed from  before  the  foundation  of  the  world. 

Then  Jesus  sent  away  the  multitudes,  and  went 
into  the  house.  And  his  disciples  came  to  him, 
and  said:  Explain  to  us  the  similitude  of  the  tares 
and  the  field.  (37)  And  he  answered,  and  said  to 
them  •  He  that  soweth  the  good  seed,  is  the  Son  of 
God.    (38)  And  the  field  is  the  world.»    And  the 

good  seed  are  the  children  of  the  kin^om;  but 
le  tares  are  the  children  of  the  wicked  One. 


fixed. 


Sy.  lordo/tht 


Sy.  ^(flO 
OTf  parables 

'  Sy.  eructate 


Sy   ]^V\ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


26 


MATTHEW,   XIII. 


■Sy.]jL4CD 

^  Sy.  consum- 
mation. 


P  or,  good. 
'  Sy. 

■  Sy.  •CdL-i 

Gr.  yivog. 

t  Sy.  consum- 
motion. 


or,  parables. 


*Sy. 


(89)    The    enemy  that  sowed  them,  is  Sataii.°>  89 
The  harvest  is  the  end^  of  the  world  :<>  and  the 
reapers  are  the  angels.      (40)  As  therefore  the  40 
tares  are  gathered  and  burned  in  the  fire ;  so  will 
it  be  in  the  end  of  the  world.    (41)  The  Son  of  41 
man  will  send  forth  his  angels,  and  they  will 
gather  out  of  his  kingdom  all  the  stumbling  olocks, 
and  all  the  doers  of  evil ;  (42)  and  will  cast  them  42 
into  a  furnace  of  fire.     There  will  be  wailing  and 
gnashing  of  teeth.    (43)  Then  will  the  righteous  48 
shine  as  the  sun,  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father. 
He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear.   (44)  Again,  44 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  treasure  that  is 
hid  in  a  field ;  which  when  a  man  findeth,  he  con- 
cealeth  it,  and,  from  his  joy,  he  goeth  and  selleth 
all  that  he  hath,  and  buyeth  that  field.   (45)  Again,  45 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  a  merchantman,  who 
sought  after  rich?  pearls :»"  (46)  and  when  he  found  46 
one  pearl  of  great  price,  he  went  and  sold  all  that 
he  had,  and  bought  it.     (47)  Aga-in,  the  kingdom  47 
of  heaven  is  like  a  sweep  net,  wnich  was  cast  into 
the  sea,  and  collected  [fishes]  of  every  kind.^     (48J  48 
And  when  it  was  full,  they  dtew  it  to  the  shores  oi 
the  sea ;  and  they  sat  down  and  culled  over :  and 
the  good  they  put  into  vessels,  and  the  bad  they 
cast  away.    (49)  So  will  it  be  in  the  end*  of  the  49 
world.     The  angels  will  go  forth,  and  will  sever 
the  wicked  fi'om  among  the  just;  (50)  and  will  50 
cast  them  into  a  furnace  of  fire.    There  will  be 
wailing  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

Jesus  said  to  them:  Have  ye  understood  all  51 
these  things?    They  say  to  him:  Yes,  our  Lord. 
(52)  He  said  to  them :  Therefore  every  Scribe  who  52 
is  instructed  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  is  like  a 
man  who  is  master  of  a  house,  who  bringeth  forth 
from  his  treasures  things  new  and  old.    (63)  And  58 
it  was  so,  that  when  Jesus  had  ended  these  simili- 
tudes, ^  he  departed  thence. 

And  he  entered  into  his  own  city.    And  he  54 
taught  them  in  their  synagogues,  in  such  manner 
that  they  wondered,  and  said:  Whence  hath  he 
this  wisdom  and  [these]  works  of  power  ?    (65)  Is  55 
not  this  man  the  carpenter's  son?^     Is  not  his 
mother  called  Mary,  and  his  brothers  James  and 
Joses  and  Simon  and  Judas?    (56)  And  all  his  66 
sisters,  are  they  not  with  us  ?     Whence  then  hath 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XIV. 


27 


67  this  man  all  these  things?  (57)  And  they  were 
stumbled  at  him.  But  Jesus  saia  to  them :  There 
is  no  prophet  who  is  little,  except  in  his  own  city 

58  and  in  his  own  house.  (68)  And  he  did  not  per- 
form there  many  works  of  power,  because  of  tneir 
unbelief. 

XIV.  And  at  that  time  Herod  the  Tetrarch  heard 
2  the  fame  of  Jesus:    (2)  and  he  said  to  his  ser- 
vants:   This  is  John  the  Baptizer:   he  is  risen 
from  the  grave:*  therefore  works  of  power  are 
8  wrought  by  him.     (8)  Now  this  Herod  had  seized 
John,  and  bound  him  and  cast  him  into  prison  ;b 
on  account  of  Herodias,  the  wife  of  his  brother 
4  Philip.     (4)  For  John  had  said  to  him :  It  is  not 
6  lawful  for  her  to  be  thy  wife.     (6)  And  he  had 
wished  to  kill  him ;  but  he  was  afraid  of  the  peo- 
ple, seeing  that  they  regarded®  him  as  a  propnet 

6  (6)  But  when  Herod's  birthday  festival*^  occurred, 
the  daughter  of  Herodias  danced  before  the  guests; 

7  and  she  pleased  Herod*  (7)  Therefore  he  swore  to 
her  by  an  oath,  that  he  would  give  her  whatsoever 

8  she  might  ask.  (8)  And  she,  as  she  had  been  in- 
structed by  her  mother,  said :  Give  me  here  in  a 

9  dish®  the  head  of  John  the  Baptizer.  (9)  And  it 
troubled  the  king:  nevertheless,  on  account  of 
the  oath,  and  the  guests,  he .  commanded  that  it 

10  should  be  given  her.    (10)  And  he  sent  and  cut 

11  oflFthe  head  of  John  in  the  prison.  (11)  And  the 
head  was  brought  in  a  dish  and  given  to  the  girl ; 

12  and  she  brought  it  to  her  mother.  (12)  And  his 
disciples  came  and  bore  away  the  corpse,  and 
buried  [it] ;    and  they  went  and  informed  Jesus. 

13  (18)  And  Jesus,  when  he  had  heard  [it],  retired 
alone,  in  a  ship,  to  a  desert  place.  And  when  the 
multitudes  heard  [of  it],  they  followed  him  by  dry 
land  from  the  cities. 

14  And  when  Jesus  disembarked,  he  saw  great 
multitudes ;  and  he  had  compassion  on  them,  and 

16  healed  their  sick.  (16)  And  when  it  was  evening, 
his  disciples  came  to  him,  and  said  to  him :  This 
is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is  gone ;  send  away 
the  throngs  of  people,  that  they  mav  go  to  the 

16  villages,  and  buy  themselves  food.  (l6)  But  he 
said  to  them :  It  is  not  necessar?  for  them  to  go ; 

17  give  ye  them  to  eat.    (17)  And  they  said  to  him: 


*  Sy.  house  of 
the  dead, 

^  Sy.  house  of 
prisoners. 


•  Sy.  held, 

«*  Sy.  house  of 
his  nativity. 


»  Sy.  ]*M  ^  g^ 
Gr.  ^iva{-axo$ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28 


MATTHEW,   XIV. 


'  or,  filled. 

8  Sy.  aside  from, 


h  Gr.  Peter. 


87 


jXXLU^ 


We  have  nothing  here  but  five  cakes  and  two 
fishes.    (18)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Bring  them  here  18 
to  me.     (19)  And  he  commanded  the  multitudes  19 
to  recline  on  the  ground:  and  he  took  the  five 

kes  and  two  fishes,  and  he  looked  towards 
heaven,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  his 
disciples ;,  and  the  disciples  placed  before  the  mul- 
titudes. (20)  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied:'  20 
and  they  took  up  the  broken  remains,  twelve  ftdl 
baskets.  (21)  And  the  men  who  had  eaten  were  21 
five  thousand,  besidesir  the  women  and  children. 

And  immediately  he  constrained  his  disciples  to  22 
embark  in  a  ship,  and  to  go  before  him  to  the  other 
side,  while  he  sent  away  the  multitudes.    (23)  And  28 
when  he  had  sent  the  multitudes  away,  he  ascended 
a  mountain  alone  to  pray.    And  when  it  was  dark, 
he  was  there  alone. )  (24)  And  the  ship  was  dis-  24 
tant  from  landTmaiiy  furlongs :  meanwhile  it  was 
much  tossed  by  the  waves ;  for  the  wind  was  ad- 
verse to  it.    (26)  And  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  25 
night,  Jesus  came  up  to  them,  walking  upon  the 
waters.    (26)  And  his  disciples  saw  him  as  he  walk-  26 
ed  upon  the  waters,  and  they  were  perturbated: 
and  they  said.  What  we  see  is  a  spectre :  and  they 
cried  out  through  fear.  (27)  But  Jesus  immediately  27 
spoke  to  them,  and  said:  Have  courage:  it  is  I;  iJe 
not  afraid.  (28)  Cephas**  replied,  and  said  to  him :  My  28 
Lord,  if  it  be  thou,  bid  me  come  to  thee  on  the 
waters.    (29)  And  Jesus  said  to  him.  Come.    And  29 
Cephas  descended  from  the  ship,  and  walked  upon 
the  waters  to  go  to  Jesus.    (80)  But  when  he  saw  80 
the  wind  to  be  violent,  he  was  afraid,  and  began  to 
sink.    And  he  raised  his  voice,  and  said:    My 
Lord,  rescue  me.    (81)  And  immediately  our  Lora  31 
reached  forth  his  hand,  and  caught  him,  and  said    - 
to  him:  0  small  in  faith,  why  didst  thou  distrust  1 
(32)  And  as  they  entered  the  ship,  the  wind  sub-  82 
sided.    (33)  And  they  that  were  in  the  ship,  came  83 
and  worshipped  him,  and  said :   Truly  thou  art  the 
Son  of  God  I    (34)  And  they  rowed  on,  and  came  84 
to  the  land  of  Gennesaret.*    (35)  And  the  men  of  85 
that  place  knew  him  :^d  they  sent  to  all  Ahe  vil- 
lages^ajound  themj  and  theybrought  to  him  alF" 
that  were  very  sick ;  (86)  and  they  entreated  of  88 
him,  that  they  might  touch  at  least  the  extremity 
of  his  garment.  And  they  who  touched^  were  healed 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XV. 


29 


XY.   Then  came  to  Jesus  Pharisees  and  Scribes  thai 

2  were  from  Jerusalem,  and  said :  (2)  Why  do  thy 
disciples  transgress  the  tradition  of  the  elders,^ 
and  wash  not  their  hands  when  they  eat  bread? 

3  (8)  Jesus  ireplied  and  said  to  them :  Why  do  ye 
also  transgress  the  commandment  of  God,  on  ao- 

4  count  of  your  tradition?  (4)  For  God  hath  said: 
Honor  thy  father,  and  thy  mother;  and  he  that 
revileth  ms  father  or  his  mother,  shall  be  put  to 

5  death.^  (5)  But  ye  say :  Whosoever  shall  say  to 
a  father  or  to  a  mother.  Be  that  my  offering,  by 
which  ye  get  profit  from  me :  then«  he  must  not 

6  honor^  his  father  or  his  mother.  (6)  And  [thus] 
ye  make  void  the  word  of  Qt>d,  for  the  sake  of 

7  your  tradition.    (7)  Ye  hypocrites,  well  did  the 

8  prophetlsaiah  prophesy  of  you,  and  say:  (8)  This 
people  honoreth  me  with  the  lips,  but  their  heart 

9  IS  far  from  me.  (9)  And  in  vain  they  pay  me 
homage,  while  they  teach  doctrines  that  are  the 

10  precepts  of  men.  (10)  And  he  called  the  multi- 
tudes, and  said  to  them,  Hear  and  understand. 
(11)  Not  that  which  entereth  the  mouth,  defileth 


11 
12 


a  man ;  but  that  which  proceedeth  from  the  mouth, 
that  defileth  a  man.  (12)  Then  came  his  disciples, 
and  said  to  him :  Knowest  thou,  that  the  Pharisees 

13  were  offended  when  they  heard  that  speech?  (18) 
And  he  replied,  and  said  to  them :  Every  plant," 
which  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven  hath  not  planted, 

14  shall  be  eradicated.  (14)  Let  them  alone:  they 
are  blind  leaders  of  the  blmd.  And  if  a  blind  man 
leadeth  one  blind,  they  will  both  &11  into  the  ditch. 

15  (16)  And  Simon  Cephas^  answered  and  said  to 
him:   My  Lord,  explain  to  us  this  similitude.^ 

16  (16)  Ana  he  said  to  them :  Are  ye  also,  up  to  this 

17  time,  without  understanding?  (17)  Know  ye  not, 
that  whatever  entereth  the  mouth,  passeth  into  the 
belly,  and  from  there  is  ejected  by  purgation? 

18  (18)  But  that  which  proceedeth  from  the  mouth, 
'     Cometh  from  the  heart:  and  that  is  what  defileth 

19  a  man.  (19)  For,  from  the  heart  proceed  evil 
thoughts,  adultery,  murder,  whoredom,  theft,  false 

20  testimony,  reviling.  (20)  These  are  the  thin^ 
that  deme  a  man.  But  if  a  man  eat  whUe  his 
haads  are  unwashed,  he  is  not  defiled. 

21  And  Jesus  departed  from  there,  and  went  to 

22  the  confines  of  Tyre  and  Sidon.     (22)  And  lo,  a 


Sy. 


oSy.loiM 
shaUih. 

*  i.  e.  by  kind 
officet. 


e   or,  planting. 

«   Gr.  Peter. 
8   or,  parable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30 


MATTHEW,   XV. 


hSy. 


k  Sy.  breads. 


iSy. 
Gr.  <f€vpi$sg. 


woman,  a  Canaaniteas^  from  those  confines,  came 
forth,  calling  out  and  saying:  Compassionate  me,  .., 
my  Lord,  uiou  son  of  David:    my  daughter  is 
grievously  distressed  by  a  demon.'     (23)  But  he  28 
answered  her  not  a  word.    And  his  disciples  came 
and  requested  of  him,  and  said:  Send  her  away, 
for  she  crieth  after  us.    (24)  But  he  answered  and  24 
said  to  them :    I  am  not  sent,  except  to  the  sheep 
that  have  strayed  from  the  house  of  Israel.    (25)  25 
And  she  came,  and  worshipped  him,,  and  said :  / 
Help  me,. my  Lord.    (26)  Jesus  said  to  her:  It  is  26 
not  proper,  to  take  the  bread  of  the  children  and 
throw  it  to  the  dogs.   (27)  And  she  said :  Even  so,  27 
mv  Lord ;  yet  the  dogs^eat  of  the  fragments  that 
Ml  from  the  tables  of  their  masters,  and  live. 
(28)  Then  Jesus  said  to  her :  0  woman,  great  is  28 
thy  faith :  be  it  to  thee,  as  thou  desirest.    And  her 
daughter  was  cured  from  that  hour. 

And  Jesus  departed  from  there,  and  came  to  the  29 
side  of  the  sea  of  Galilee:   and  he  ascended  a  r 
mountain,  and  sat  there.    TSO)  And  great  multi-  80 
tudes  came  to  him ;  and  with  them  were  the  lame, 
and  the  blind,  and  the  dumb,  and  the  maimed,  and 
many  others :  and  they  laid  them  at  the  feet  of 
Jesus,  and  he  healed  them.    (31)  So  that  the  mul-  31 
titudes  were  amazed,  when  they  saw  the  dumb 
speaking,  and  the  maimed  made  whole,  and  the 
lame   walking,  and  the  blind  seeing:   and  they 
praised  the  God  of  Israel    (82)  Then  Jesus  called  82 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them:  I  pity  this  multi- 
tude ;  for  lo,  these  three  days  they  have  continued 
with  me,  and  they  have  nothing  to  eat :  and  I  am 
unwilling  to  send  them  away  fasting,  lest  they 
faint  by  the  way.    (33)  His  msciples  sav  to  him :  83 
Whence  can  we  get  bread  in  the  wilderness,  to    , 
satisfy  all  this  multitude?     (84)  Jesus  said   to  84 
I  them.  How  many  loaves  have  ye  ?    They  said  to 
him,  Seven,  and  a  few  little  fishes.    (35)  And  he  86 
commanded  the    multitudes   to  recline    on    the 
ground.    (36)  And  he  took  the  seven,  loaves^  and  36 
the  fishes,  and  gave  thanks,  and  brake,  and  gave 
to  his  disciples ;  and  the  disciples  gave  to  the  mul- 
titudes.   (37)  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied.  37 
And  they  took  up  the  remains  of  fragments,  seven 
fiill  baskets.1    (88)  And  they  that  h^  eaten  were  88 
four  thousand  men,  besides  women  and  children. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,    XVI. 


H 


39  (89)  And  when  he  had  sent  away  the  multitudes, 
he  took  ship,  and  came  to  the  coasts  of  Magdala.™ 

XVL  And  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  came  near,  tempt- 
ing him,  and  asking  him  to  show  them  a  sign 

2  from  heaven.  (2)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to 
them :  When  it  is  evening  ye  say.  It  will  be  fair 

8  weather;  for  the  heavens*  are  red.  (8)  And  in  the 
mominff  ye  say.  There  will  be  a  storm  to-day; 
for  the  heavens  are  sadly  red.  Ye  hypocrites,  ye 
are  intelligent  to  discover  the  aspect  of  tne  heavens, 
but  the  signs  of  this  time  ye  have  no  skill  to  dis- 

4  cem.  (4)  A  wicked  and  adulterous  generation 
asketh  for  a  sign ;  but  no  sign  shall  be  ^ven  it, 
but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonah.  And  he  left 
them,  and  departed. 

5  And  when  his  disciples  had  come  to  the  &rther 
shore,  ^  they  had  forgotten  to  take  bread  with 

6  them.     (6)  And  he  said  to  them:  Take  heed,  and 
'   beware  of  the  leaven  of  the  Pharisees  and  the  Sad- 

7  ducees.  (7)  And  they  reasoned  among  themselves, 
and  said,  [it  was]  because  they  had  taken  no  bread. 

8  (8)  But  Jesus  knew  [it]  and  said  to  them :  0  ye 
small  in  faith !  why  reason  ye  among  yourselves 

9  because  ye  *  we  taken  no  bread?  (9)  Have  ye 
not  yet  understood  ?  Do  ye  not  rememoer  the  five 
loaves  and  the  five  thousand,  and  the  many  bask- 

10  ets«  ve  took  up?  {10)  Nor  the  seven  loaves  and 
the  K)ur  thousand,  ana  the  manv  baskets^  ye  took 

11  up?  (11)  How  is  it  that  ye  do  not  understand 
that  it  was  not  concerning  bread  that  I  spoke  to 
you ;  but  that  ye  should  beware  of  the  leaven  of 

12  the  Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees?  (12')  Then 
understood  they,  that  he  did  not  bid  them  oeware 
of  the  leaven  of  bread,  but  of  the  doctrine®  of  the 
Pharisees  and  of  the  Sadducees. 

18  And  when  Jesus  came  into  the  region  of  Osb- 
sarea  Philippi,  he  questioned  his  disciples,  and 
said :  What  do  men  say  concerning  me,  that  I  the 

14  Son  of  man,  am?  (14)  And  they  said:  Some  say 
that  [thou  art]  Jonn  the  Baptizer;  but  others, 
Elijah ;  and  others,  Jeremiah,  or  one  of  the  proph- 

15  ets.    (15)   He  said  to  them:    But,   who  do  ye 

16  yourselves  say  that  I  am?  (16)  Simon  Cephas^ 
answered  and  said :  Thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son 

17  of  the  living  God.    (17)  Jesus  answered,  and  said 


Qj.Of^ 


•  Sy.  the  heaven 

IS. 


I^a:^ 


Sy. 

Sy. 


Sy. 


'  Gr.  Simon  P» 
ter. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


32 


MATTHEW,   XVIL 


L  e.  arocL 
^  Sy.  aZ^ 

>  Sy.  ^^Oj-*, 

the  grave, 

^  Sy.  i;:xd, 

Gr.  xXsi^o^. 


-Sy. 

"» Gr.  Peter, 


o  Sy.  ]i  ^oft 


p  Sj.  to  keep  his 
MotUaHve. 


By.  aiMJ2U 


•  Gr.  Peter. 


to  him:   Blessed  art  thou,  Simon  son  of  Jonas; 
for  flesh  and  blood  have  not  revealed  [it]  to  thee, 
but  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.    (18)  Also  I  say  18 
to  thee,  that  thou  art  Cephas :  and  upon  this  rock,f 
I  will  build  my  church  :^  and  the  gates  of  death' 
shall  not  triumph  over  it    (19)  To  thee  will  I  19 
give  the  keys^  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven :    and 
whatever  thou  shalt  bind  on  earth,  shall  be  bound 
in  heaven:  and  whatever  thou  shalt  unbind  on 
earth,  shall  be  unbound  in  heaven.     (20)   Then  20 
he  enjoined  on  his  disciples,  that  they  should  tell 
no  man  that  he  was  the  Messiah. 

And  from  that  time  Jesus  began  to  show  to  21 
his  disciples,  that  he  was  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem, 
and  to  suffer  much  from  the  Elaers,^  and  from 
the  chief  priests™  and  Scribes,  and  be  killed,  and 
on  the  third  day  arise.    {22)  And  Oephasn  took  22 
him,  and  began  to  rebuke  him;  and  he  said:  Far 
be  it  from  thee,  my  Lord,  that  this  should  be  to 
thee.     (28)  But  he  turned,  and  said  to  Cephas:  23 
Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan  :<>  Thou  art  a  stumbling- 
block  to  me ;  for  thou  thinkest  not  the  things  of 
God,  but  the  things  of  men. 

Then  said  Jesus  to  his  disciples :  If  any  one  de-  24 
sireth  to  come  after  me,  let  him  deny  himself;  and 
let  him  bear  his  cross,  and  come  after  me.    (25)  25 
For,  whoever  chooseth  to  preserve  his  life,P  shall 
lose  it;   and  whoever  will  lose  his  life  for  my 
sake,  shall  find  it.     (26)  For  what  will  it  profit  26 
a  man,  if  he  shall  gain  the  whole  world,  and 
shall  lose  his  soifl?'    Or  what  will  a  man  give 
in  exchange  for  his  soul?    (27)  For  the  Son  of  27 
man  is  to  come  in  the  glory  of  his  Father,  with 
all  his  holy  angels ;  and  then  will  he  recompense 
to  eveiy  man  as  his  deeds  arej   (28)  Verily  I  28 
say  to  you:  "There  are  "soine  persons  standing 
here,  who  shall  not  taste  death,  till  they  see  the 
Son  of  man  coming  in  his  kingdom. 

And  after  six  days  Jesus  took  Cephas,*  XTIL 
and  James,  and  John  his  brother,  and  conducted 
them  alone  to  a  high  mountain.    (2)  And  Jesus    2 
was  changed  before  them:  and  his  face  shone  like 
the  sun;  and  his  vestments  became  white  like  the 
light    (8)  And  there  appeared  to  them  Moses  and    3 
Elijah,  in  conversation  with  him.    (4)  Then  Oe-    4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW.   XVIL 


88 


phas  answered  and  said  to  Jesus:  My  Lord,  it  is 
good  for  us  to  be  here :  and,  if  it  please  thee,  we 
will  make  here  three  b^ot^   one  for  thee,  and 

5  one  for  Moses,  and  oneTor  Elijah.  (6)  And  while 
he  was  yet  speaking,  lo,  a  bright  cloud  over- 
shadowed them :  and  there  was  a  voice  from  the 
doud  which  said:  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in 

6  whom  I  have  pleasure;  hear  ye  him.  (6)  And 
when  the  disciples  heard  [it],  they  fell  on  their 

7  faces,  and  were  much  afraid.  (7)  And  Jesus  came 
to  them  and  touched  them,  and  said:  Arise,  and 

8  be  not  afraid.     (8)  And  they  raised  their  eyes, 

9  and  they  saw  no  person,  except  Jesus  only.  (9) 
And  as  they  came  down  from  tne  mountain,  Jesus 
charged  them,  and  said  to  them:  Speak  of  this 
vision  before  no  person,  until  the  Son  of  man  shall 

LO  have  arisen  from  the  dead.  (10)  And  his  disciples 
asked  him,  and  said  to  him:   Why  then  do  the 

11  Scribes  say,  that  Elijah  must  first  come?  (11)  Je- 
sus answered,  and  said  to  them :  Elijah  doth  first 

12  come,  to  fulfill  eveiy  thing.  (12)  And  I  say  to 
you,  That,  behold,  iSlijah  hath  come,  and  they  did 
not  know  him ;  and  they  have  done  to  him  what- 
ever they  pleased:  and,  in  like  manner,  also  the 

13  Son  of  man  is  to  suffer  from  them.  (18)  Then  the 
disciples  imderstood,  that  he  spake  to  them  of  John 
the  Baptizer.  ^ ^^ 

14  Ana  when  they  came  to  the  multitude,  a  man 
approached  him,  and  bowed  himself  on  his  knees, 

15  (15)  and  said  to  him:  My  Lord,  compassionate 
me.  I  have  a  son  who  is  a  lunatic,  and  grievously 
afflicted;  for  often  he  falleth  into  the  fire,  and  often 

16  into  the  water.    (16)  And  I  brought  him  to  thy 

17  disciples,  and  they  could  not  heal  him.  (17)  Je- 
sus answered  and  said:  0  unbelieving  and  per- 
verse generation  I  How  long  shall  I  be  with  you? 
and  how  long  bear  with  you  ?     Bring  him  here  to 

18  me.  (18)  And  Jesus  rebuked  the  demon,  and  it 
departed  from  him :  and  from  that  hour  the  child 

19  was  healed.  (19)  Then  came  the  disciples  to  Je- 
sus, apart,  and  said  to  him:  Why  could  not  we 

20  heal  mm  ?  (20)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Because  of 
your  unbelief.  For  verily  I  say  to  you.  That  if 
there  be  in  you  faith  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed, 
ye  may  say  to  this  mountain,  Remove  hence,  and 
it  wiU  remove:  and  nothing  wiU  be  too  hard  for 


Digitized  by 


^ 


Google 


M 


MATTHEW,   XVIIL 


c  or,  conversanL 


sy.  ^101 


"  or,  sons  of 
freedom. 


Sy.  IJAcdI, 

Gr.  tfrar^pa^ 
"Sy. 


^  Sy.  ratios  of 
stumbling. 


'Sy. 


£ 


ou.    (21)  But  this  kind*»  goeth  not  oat,  except  21 
►y  fasting  and  prayer. 

And  while  they  were  resident®  in  Galilee,  Jesus  22 
said  to  them:  The  Son  of  man  is  to  be  betrayed 
into  the  hands  of  men;  (23)  and  they  will  kill  23 
him;  and  the  third  day  he  will  arise.    And  it 
saddened  them  much. 

And  when  they  came  to  Capernaum,  those  who  24 
receive  the  two  drachmas^  of  capitation  money 
came  to  Cephas,  and  said  to  him :  Doth  not  your 
rabbi  pay  his  two  drachmas?    (25)  He  said  to  25 
them,   Yes.     And  when  Cephas  had  entered  the 
house,  Jesus  anticipated  him  and  said  to  him: 
How  doth  it  appear  to  thee,  Simon  ?    The  kings 
of  the  earth,  of  whom  do  they  receive  tribute  and 
capitation  money?  of  their  children,  or  of  aliens? 
(26)  Simon  said  to  him:  Of  aliens.    Jesus  said  to  26 
him:  Then  the  children  are  free.®     (27)  But  still,  27 
lest  they  be  stumbled  with  us,  go  thou  to  the  sea 
and  cast  in  a  fish-hook,  and  the  fish  that  shall  first 
come  up,  open  its  mouth,  and  thou  wilt  find  a 
stater  :f  that  take,  and  give  for  me  and  for  thysel£ 


In  that  hour  the  disciples  approached  Je-  XV  ill 
sus,  and  said:   Who  is  the  greatest  in  the  king- 
dom of  heaven?    (2)  And  Jesus  called  a  child,*    2 
and  placed  him  in  the  midst  of  them,  (8)  and  said :     3 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  that  unless  ye  be  converted, 
and  become  like  children,**  ye  will  not  enter  the 
kingdom  of  heaven.     (4)  He  therefore  that  shall    4 
humble  himself  like  this  child,  he  will  be  great  in 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.    (5)  And  he  that  shall    £ 
receive  in  my  name  [one  who  is]  like  to  this  child, 
he  receiveth  me.     (6)  And  whosoever  shall  stum- 
ble one  of  these  little  ones^  that  believe  in  me,  it 
were  better  for  him  that  a  millstone  were  suspended 
to  his  neck,  and  that  he  were  sunk  in  the  depths 
of  the  sea.    (7)  Woe  to  the  world  because  of  stum- 
bling blocks!^    For  it  must  be,  that  stumbling 
blocKs  come.    But,  woe  to  the  person  by  whose 
means  the  stumbling  blocks  come.    (8)  If  then  thy 
hand  or  thy  foot  make  thee  stumble,  cut  it  ofi^  and 
cast  it  from  thee :  for  it  is  good  for  thee  to  enter 
into  life  lame  or  mutilated,  and  not  that,  with  two 
hands  or  two  feet,  thou  fall  into  eternal*  fire, 
(9)  And  if  thine  eye  make  thee  stumble,  pluck  it 


6 


8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XVIIL 


S6 


out  and  cast  it  from  thee :  for  it  is  good  for  thee  to 
enter  into  life  with  one  eye,  and  not  that,  with  two 

10  eyes,  thou  fall  into  the  helK  of  fire.  (10)  See  that 
ye  despise  not  one  of  these  little  ones ;  for  I  say  to 
you,  Tnat  their  angelsir  in  heaven,  at  all  times,  are 
beholding  the  face  of  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven. 

11  (11)  For  the  Son  of  man,  hath  come  to  give  life^ 

12  to  that  which  was  lost.»  (12)  How  doth  it  appear 
to  you?  K  a  man  should  have  a  hundred  sneep, 
and  one  of  them  should  go  astray,  will  he  not 
leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  mountains,  and 

IS  go  and  seek  the  one  that  strayed  ?  (13)  And  if  he 
find  it,  verily  I  say  to  you,  that  he  rejoiceth  in  it, 
more  than  in  the  ninety  and  nine  that  did  not 

14  stray.  (14)  Just  so,  it  is  not  the  pleasure  of  your 
Father  who  is  in  heaven,  that  one  of  these  little 
ones^  should  perish.^  *^'^... 

15  Moreover,  if  thy  brother  commit  an  offence"' 
against  thee,  go  and  admonish  him  between  thee 
and  him  only.     K  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained 

16  thy  brother.  (16)  But  if  he  hear  thee  not,  take 
with  thee  one  or  two,  that  at  the  mouth  of  two  or 
three  witnesses  eyery  word^  may  be  established. 

17  (17)  And  if  he  will  also  not  hear  them,  tell  [it] 
to  the  church.o  And  if  he  will  also  not  hear  the 
church,  let  him  be  to  thee  as  a  publican  and 

18  heathen.P     (18)  Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  whatever 
ye  shall  bind'  on  earth,  shall  be  bound  in  heaven 
and  whatever  ye  shall  unbind  on  earth,  shall  be 

19  unbound  in  heaven.  (19)  Again  I  say  to  you, 
That  if  two  of  you  shall  agree*  on  earth  concerning 
any  thing  that  they  shall  ask,  it  shall  be  to  them* 

20  from  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven.  (20)  For  where 
two  or  three  [are]  assembled  in  my  name,  there 
[am]  I  in  the  midst  of  them. 

21  Then  Cephas^  approached  him,  and  said  to  him 
My  Lord,  how  many  times,  if  my  brother  commit 
offence  against  me,w  shall  I  forgive  him?  up  to 

22  seven  times?  (22)  Jesus  said  to  him:  I  do  not 
say  to  thee,  up  to  seven  times^  hut  ^]p  tn  fipy^ntytin  gy^ 

23  times  seven.  \(28)    'I'hereibre   the  kingdom  of  vrr>s^^fr>i 
heaven  is  like  to  some  king,  who  wished  to  have 

24  a  reckoning  with  his  servants.  (24)  And  when 
he  began  to  reckon,  they  brought  to  him   one 

25  debtor  of  ten  thousand  talents.*     (25)  And  as  he 


Sy. 

Gr.  yigv¥a7 

Sy.  Vk*J 

Sy. 

»  Sy.  ^lij   ^ 

•»  Sy. 

•  Sy.  ]liD  ^ 

•Sy.lZ^ 

Ihe  regular 
meeting. 

p  oTy  profane 
man, 

'  Sy.  ^^]L 

*  or,  accord* 

'  L  e.  they  sJubQ 
haveU. 

»  Gr.  Peter. 


had  not  wherewith  to  pay,  his  lord  conmiandedl 


Sy.  ^{.I^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


86 


MATTHEW,   XIX. 


y  Sy.  ]'ix^}, 

about  m 
cents  each. 


,  Sy.  house  of 
prisoners. 


•  or,  evil,  bad. 


•  or,  words. 


him  to  be  sold,  him  and  his  wife  and  his  children, 
and  all  that  he  possessed,  and  payment  to  be 
made.     (26)  And  that  servant  fell  down  and  wor-  26 
shipped  him,  and  said:  My  lord,  have  patience 
witn  me,  and  I  will  pay  thee  the  whole.    (27)  And  27 
his  lord  had  compassion  on  that  servant,  and  set 
him  free,  and  forgave  him  his  debt     (28)  Then  28 
that  servant  went  out,  and  found  one  of  his  fellow- 
servants  who  owed  him  a  hundred  denarii.y     And 
he  laid  hold  of  him  and  choked  him,  and  said  to 
him:  Pay  me  what  thou  owest  me.     (29)  And  29 
that  fellow-servant  fell  at  his  feet  and  entreated 
him,  and  said:  Have  patience  with  me,  and  I  will 
pay  thee  the  whole.    (30)  But  he  would  not,  but  30 
went  and  cast  him  into  prison,*  until  he  should 
pajr  him  what  he  owed  him.     (31)  And  when  31 
their  fellow-servants  saw  what  was  done,  it  grieved 
them  much ;  and  they  came  and  made  known  to 
their  lord  all  that  had  occurred.    (32)  Then  his  32 
lord  called  him,  and  said  to  him :  Thou  vile*  ser- 
vant 1    Lo,  I  forgave  thee  that  whole  debt,  because 
thou  entreatedst  of  me:  (33)  oughtest  not  thou  33 
also  to  have  compassion  on  tny  fellow-servant,  as 
I  had  compassion  on  thee?    (34)  And  his  lord  34 
was  angry,  and  delivered  him  over  to  the  torturers, 
until  he  should  pay  all  he  owed  him.     (36)  So  35 
will  my  Father  who  is  in  heaven  do  to  you,  unless 
ye  from  your  heart  forgive  each  his  brother  his 
offence. 

And   when    Jesus   had    ended    these    dis-  XTX. 
courses,**  he  removed  from  Galilee,  and  came  to 
the  confines  of  Judsea  on  the  other  side  of  Jordan. 
(2)  And  great  multitudes  followed  after  him,  and    2 
he  healed  them  there.     (3)  And  Pharisees  came    8 
to  him,  and  tempted  him  and  said:    Is  it  lawful 
for  a  man  to  divorce  his  wife  for  every  cause? 
(4)  And  he  answered  and  said  to  them :  Have  ye    4 
not  read,  that  he  who  made  [them]  at  the  begin- 
ning, made  them  a  male  and  a  female  ?    (5)  And    5 
he  said:   For  this  reason,  a  man  shall  leave  his 
father  and  his  mother,  and  adhere  to  his  wife; 
and  they  two  shall  be  one  flesh.     (6)  Wherefore    6 
they  were  not  two,  but  one  flesh.      What  there- 
fore God  hath  united,  let  not  man  sunder.      (7J    7 
They  say  to  him :  Why  then  did  Moses  commana 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XIX. 


87 


to  give  a  bill*>  of  divorce,  and  to  put  her  away? 

8  (8)  He  said  to  them :  Moses,  on  account  of  the 
hardness  of  your  heart,  permitted  you  to  divorce 
your  wives :  but  from  the  beginning  it  was  not  so. 

9  (9)  And  I  say  to  you,  That  whoever  leaveth  his 
wife  not  beinff  an  adulteress,  and  taketh©  another, 
conmiitteth  adultery.     And  whoever  taketh  her 

10  that  is  divorced,  committeth  adultery.  (10)  His 
disciples  sa;^  to  him :  K  such  is  the  case  between 
man  and  wife,  it  is  not  expedient  to  take  a  wife. 

11  (11)  But  he  said  to  them:  Not  every  one  is  ca- 
pable of  that  thing,^  but  he  only  to  whom  it  is 

12  given.  (12)  For  mere  are  some  eunuchs,  bom  so 
from  their  mother's  womb ;  and  there  are  some 
eunuchs,  who  were  made  eunuchs  hj  men;  and 
there  are  some  eunuchs  who  have  made  themselves 
eunuchs  for  the  sake  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
He  that  can  be  contented  let  him  be  contented. 

13  Then  they  brought  children©  to  him,  that  he 
might  lay  his  hand  upon  them  and  pray.     And 

14  his  disciples  rebuked  them.  (14)  But  Jesus  said 
to  them:  Allow  children  to^come  to  me,  and  for- 
bid them  not ;  for  of  those  that  are  like  them  is 

15  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  (15)  And  he  laid  his 
hand  upon  them,  and  departed  from  there. 

16  And  one  came,  drew  near,  and  said  to  him : 
Good  Teacher,**  what  good  thing  must  I  do,  that 

17  eternal  life  may  be  mine?  (17^  And  he  said  to 
him :  Why  callest  thou  me  gooa?  There  is  none 
good,  except  one,  [namelyj  God.  But  if  thou 
wouldst  enter  into  life,sr  keep  the  commandments.^ 

18  (18)  He  said  to  him.  Which?  And  Jesus  said  to 
him:  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  and  thou  shalt  not  com- 
mit adultery ;  and  thou  shalt  not  steal ;  and  thou 

19  shalt  not  bear  fiJse  testimony;  (19)  and  honor  thy 
fiEkther  and  thy  mother;  and  thou  shalt  love  thv 

20  neighbor  as  thyself  (20^  The  young  man  saitli 
to  Imn :  All  these  have  I  kept  fix>m  my  childhood. 

21  What  do  I  lack?  (21)  Jesus  saith  to  him:  If 
thou  desirest  to  be  perrect,»  go,  sell  thy  property, 
and  give  to  the  poor;  and  there  shall  De'  for  thee 
a  treasure  in  heaven ;   and  come  thou  after  me. 

22  (22)  And  the  young  man  heard  that  speech,^  and 
he  went  away  in  sadness ;  for  he  had  much  proper- 

28  ty.  (28)  And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  Verily 
1  say  to  you,  It  is  difl&cult  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 


^  OTt  writing. 


or,  ffiorrwAi 


^  or,  word. 


•sy.]il; 


Sy. 
k  Sy.  ^-Oa£> 


•Sy.lMSQ^ 

k  or,  thou  shall 
have. 


or,  toord. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


88 


MATTHEW,   XX. 


n>  Sy.  can  live. 


»»  Gr.  Peter. 

"*  OT,  shaU  be  to 
us? 


p  Sy. 
»  or,  rule. 

•  Sy.  l^i^j, 
about  15i 
cents. 

b  About  9  A.  M. 
<^  Noon,  and  3 

P.M. 

^  About  5  F.  M . 


«Sy. 


into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.    (24)  And  agam,  I  24 
say  to  you :  It  is  easier  for  a  camel  to  enter  the 
aperture  of  a  needle,  than  for  a  rich  man  to  enter 
the  kingdom  of  God.     (25)  And  when  the  disci-  25 
pies  heard  [it],  thej  wondered  greatly,  and  said: 
Who  then  can  attain  to  life  1™     (26)  Jesus  looked  26 
oh  them,  and  said  to  them :  With  men  this  is  not 
practicable,  but  with  God  every  thing  is  practi- 
cable.    (27)  Then  answered  Cephas, »  and  said  to  27 
him :  Lo,  we  have  forsaken  every  thing,  and  come 
after  thee :  what  therefore  shall  we  receive  ?<>    (28)  28 
Jesus  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you,  tha^  as 
for  you  who  have  followed  me,  when  the  Son  of 
man  shall  sit  on  the  throne  of  his  glory  in  the 
new  world,?  ye  also  shall  sit  on  twelve  seats,  and 
shall  judge'  tne  twelve  tribes  of  Israel.    (29)  And  29 
every  man  that  relinquisheth  houses,  or  brothers 
or  sisters,  or  father  or  mother,  or  wife  or  children, 
or  lands,  for  mv  name's  sake,  shall  receive  an 
hundredfold,  ana  shall  inherit  eternal  life.'      (30)  30 
But  there  are  many  first  who  shall  be  last,  ana 
last  [who  shall  be]  first.    (XX.)  For  the  kingdom  XX. 
of  heaven  is  like  a  man,  the  lord  of  a  house,  who 
went  out,  at  dawn  of  day,  to  hire  laborers  for  his 
viuCTard.     (2)  And  he  contracted  with  the  labor-    2 
ers  JOT  a  denarius*  a  day :  and  sent  them  into  his 
vineyard.    (8)  And  he  went  out  at  the  third  hour,**    3 
and  saw  others  standing  idle  in  the  market-place : 
(4)  and  he  said  to  them.  Go  ye  also  into  mv  vine- 
yard, and  what  is  right  I  will  give  you ;  (5)  and 
thev  went     And  again  he  went  out  at  the  sixth 
and  ninth  hours,^  and  did  the  same.     (6)   And 
about  the  eleventh  hour,^  he  went  out  ana  found 
others  who  were  standing  and  idle ;  and  he  said  to 
them:  Why  stand  ye  all  the  day,  and  are  idle? 
(7)  They  say  to  him,  Because  no  one  hath  hired 
us.     He  saith  to  them:  Go  ye  also  into  the  vine- 
yard ;  and  what  is  right  ye  shall  receive.    (8)  And 
when  it  was  evening,  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  said 
to  his  steward:®  Call  the  laborers,  and  give  them 
their  wages;    and  commence  with  the  last,  and 

Eroceed  to  the  first.  (9)  And  those  of  the  eleventh 
our  came,  and  received  each  a  denarius.  (10) 
And  when  the  first  came,  they  supposed  they 
should  receive  more ;  but  they  also  received  eacn 
A  denarius.     (11)  And  when  they  received  [it],  11 


8 


9 
10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,  XX 


89 


they  murmured  against  the  lord  of  the  house, 

12  (12)  and  said:  These  last  have  labored  but  one 

hour,  and  thou  hast  made  them  equal  with  us  who 

have  borne  the  burden  of  the  day  and  the  heat  of 

18  it  (13)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  one  of 
them :  My  firiend,  I  do  thee  no  injustice:  was  it  not 
for  a  denarius  that  thou  didst  contract  with  me? 

14  (14)  Take  what  belongeth  to  thee,  and  go :  for  I 

15  am  disposed  to  give  to  this  last,  as  to  thee.  (15) 
Is  it  not  lawful  for  me,  to  do  what  I  please  with 
what  belongeth  to  me ;   or  is  thy  eye  evil,^  be- 

16  cause  I  am  good?flr  (16)  Thus  the  last  shall  be 
first,  and  the  first  last:  for  the  called  are  many, 
but  the  chosen  are  few. 

17  And  Jesus  was  about  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem : 
and  he  took  his  twelve  disciples  aside,  on  the  way, 

L8  and  said  to  them :  (18)  Benold,  we  are  going  to 
Jerusalem ;  and  the  Son  of  man  will  be  delivered 
up  to  the  chief  priests**  and  to  the  Scribes,  and  they 

19  wHl  condemn  him  to  death.  (19)  And  they  will  de- 
liver him  over  to  the  Gentiles:'  and  they  will  mock 
him,  and  will  scourge  him,  and  will  crucify  him ; 

20  and  the  third  day,  he  will  arise.  (20)  Then  came 
to  him  the  mother  of  Zebedee's  chilaren,  she  and 
her  sons;   and  she  worshipped  him,  and  asked 

21  something  &om  him.  (21)  And  he  said  to  her, 
What  desirest  thou?  She  said  to  him:  Say,  that 
these  my  two  sons  shall  sit,  the  one  on  thy  right 
hand  and  the  other  on  thy  left,  in  thy  kingdom. 

22  (22)  Jesus  answered  and  said :  Ye  know  not  what 
ye  ask  for.  Can  ye  drink  of  the  cup,  of  which  I 
am  to  drink?  or  be  baptized^  with  the  baptism,' 
that  I  am  baptized  withr    They  say  to  him:  We 

28  can.  (23)  He  saith  to  them :  Ye  will  [indeed]  drink 
of  my  cup,  and  will  be  baptized  with  the  baptism 
that  I  am  baptized  with :  but  that  ye  should  sit  on 
my  right  hand  and  on  my  left,  is  not  mine  to  give, 
except  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared  by  my 

24  Father.    (24)  And  when  the  ten  heard  [it],  they 

25  were  angry  against  the  two  brothers.  (25)  And 
Jesus  called  them,  and  said  to  them:  Ye  knv>w 
that  the  princes™  of  the  nations  are  their  lords,  and 
their  great  men^  exercise  authority  over  them, 

26  (26)  mt  so  shall  it  be  among  you.  But  whoever 
among  you  desireth  to  be  great,  let  him  be  to 

27  you,  a  ministerer :«  (27)  and  whoever  among  you 


'  i.  e.  envious, 
the.  generous. 


'  Sy.  ^|k^ 
'Sy. 


"Sy, 

"  Sy. 
^0(7UJLD90^ 

-Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


40 


MATTHEW,   XXL 


►  Sy.  1^1:12. 
Sy.  ]jLo5aa 


'  Qy>  gave  voice. 


■  Sy. 

^  or,  near  to. 


•  Sy.  a  muUi' 
iude  of  throngs. 


*  Sy.  \l2^o] 

•  I  e.  p2ac65,  or 
t^  heavens. 


desiretli  to  be  first,  let  him  be  your  servant:? 
(28)  even  as  the  Son  of  man  came,  not  to  be  28 
served,  but  to  serve ;  and  to  give  his  life  a  ransom' 
for  many. 

And  as  Jesus  passed  out  of  Jericho,  a  great  29 
multitude  followed  him,    (30)  And  lo,  two  blind  80 
men  were  sitting  by  the  way  side.    And  when 
thev  heard  that  Jesus  was  passmg,  they  called  out,* 
and  said :  Have  compassion  on  us,  my  Lord,  thou 
son  of  David !     (31)  And  the  multitudes  rebuked  81 
them,  that  they  might  be  silent.     But  they  raised 
their  voice  the  more,  and  said :  Our  Lord,  have 
compassion  on  us,  thou  son  of  David.     (32)  And  32 
Jesus  stopped,  and  called  them,  and  said:  What 
wish  ye,  that  I  should  do  for  you?    (83)  They  33 
said  to  him:   Our  Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be 
opened.     (84)  And  he  had  compassion  on  them,  84 
and  touched  their  eyes:   and  immediately  their 
eyes  were  opened,  ana  they  followed  him. 

And  as  he  approached  Jerusalem,  and  came  XXL 
to  Bethphage,*   by  the  side*»   of  the  mount  of 
Olives,  Jesus  sent  two  of  his  disciples ;  (2)  and  said    2 
to  them :  Go  into  this  village  which  is  over  against 
you,  and  directly  ye  will  find  an  ass  tied,  and  a 
colt  with  her.     Untie  and  bring  [them]  to  me. 
(3^  And  if  any  man  say  iJught  to  you,  tell  him,     8 
Tnat  they  are  needed  by  our  Lord :  and  at  once  he 
will  send  them  hither.    (4)  Now  this  whole  occur-    4 
rence  was,  that  so  might  be  fulfilled  that  which 
was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying:  (5)  Tell  ye    5 
the  daughter  of  Sion,  Behold,  thy  king  cometh  to 
thee,  meek,  and  riding  on  an  ass,  and  on  a  colt  the 
foal  of  an  ass.    (6)  And  the  disciples  went,  and  did    6 
as  Jesus  commanded  them.   (7)  And  they  brought    7 
the  ass  and  the  colt    And  they  placed  their  gar- 
ments on  the  colt,  and  set  Jesus  upon  it    (8)  And    8 
a  very  great  throngc  strewed  their  clothes  in  the 
path ;  and  others  cut  branches  from  the  trees,  and 
cast  them  in  the  path.    (9)  And  the  multitudes    9 
that  went  before  him,  and  that  followed  after  him, 
shouted  and  said :  Hosanna*^  to  the  son  of  David : 
Blessed  is  he  that  cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord: 
Hosanna  in  the  highest.®     (10)  And  as  he  entered  10 
Jerusalem,  the  whole  city  was  in  commotion ;  and 
they  said,  Who  is  this?    (11)  And  the  multitudes  11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,  XXI. 


41 


said,  This  is  Jesas  the  prophet,  who  is  from  Naza* 

12  reth  of  Galilee.  (12)  Ana  Jesus  entered  into  the 
temple  of  God,  and  expelled  all  them  that  bought 

>  and  sold  in  the  temple,  and  overset  the  counters 
of  the  money-brokers,  and  the  seats  of  them  that 

13  sold  doves.  (18)  And  he  said  to  them :  It  is  writ- 
ten, my  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of  prayer; 

14  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  robber*.  (14)  And 
there  came  to  him  in  the  temple  the  blind  and  the 

15  lame;  and  he  healed  them.  (15)  And  when  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  saw  the  wonderful 
things  which  he  performed,  and  the  children 
shouting  in  the  temple  and  saying,  Hosanna  to 
the  son  of  David,  their  indignation  was  excited. 

16  (16)  And  they  said  to  him:  Hearest  thou  what 
these  are  saying?  Jesus  said  to  them:  Yes. 
Have  ye  never  read.  Out  of  the  mouth  of  children 

17  and  infants  thou  hast  acquired  praise  ?  (17)  And 
he  left  them,  and  retired  out  of  tne  city  to  Bemany,^ 

18  and  lodged  there.    (18)  And  in  the  morning,  when 

19  he  returned  to  the  city,  he  was  hungry.  (19)  And 
he  saw  a  fig-tree  by  the  way,  and  came  to  it  and 
found  nothing  on  it,  except  leaves  only.  And  he 
said  to  it:  There  shall  no  more  be  mdt  on  thee 
for  ever.?    And  immediately  the  fig-tree  withered. 

20  (20)  And  the  disciples  saw  [it],  and  admired,  and 
said:  How  suddenly  hath  the  fig-tree  withered* 

21  (21)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them :  Verily  I  sav 
to  you.  That  if  there  be  faith  in  you,  and  ye  shall 
not  doubt,  ye  may  not  only  do  this  thing  of  the 
fig-tree,  but  also  u  ye  shall  say  to  this  mountain, 
be  thou  lifted  up,  and  fall  into  the  sea,  it  will  be  so. 

22  (22)  And  whatsoever  ye  shall  ask  in  prayer,  and 
28  shall  believe,  ye  shall  receive.     (28)  And  when 

Jesus  came  to  the  temple,  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Elders*»  of  the  people  came  to  him  as  he  was 
teaching,  and  said  to  him:  By  what  authority 
doest  thou  these  things?    And  who  gave  thee  this 

24  authority?  (24)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them: 
I  also  will  ask  you  one  question, »  and  if  ye  will 
tell  me,  I  also  will  tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do 

26  these  things.  (25)  The  baptism^  of  John,  from 
whence  was  itr  From  heaven,  or  from  men? 
And  they  reasoned  among  themselves,^  and  said : 
If  we  should  say.  From  heaven;  he  will  say  to  us, 

26  Why  did  ye  not  believe  in  him?    (26)  And  if  we 


>  Sy    Sr^\v\ 


hSy.ViZ«uAJ3 


'  or,  xDord. 

k  Sy 

1  or,  toilh  them 
Melves. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


42 


MATTHEW,    XXL 


"  Sy.  12qj]o 


'  or,  parable. 


'By.hadlyMd' 


ahouldsay,  From  men;  we  are  afraid  of  the  multi- 
tude,  for  they  all  hold  John  as  a  prophet     (27)  27 
And  they  answered,  and  said  to  him :   We  do  not 
know.    Jesus  said  to  them :  Neither  do  I  tell  you 
by  what  authority  I  do  these  things.    (28)  feut  28 
how  appeareth  it  to  you?    A  certain  man  had 
two  sons;  and  he  came  to  the  first  and  said  to 
him,  My  son,  go,  labor  to-day  in  the  vineyard. 
(29)  And  he  answered  and  said,  I  am  not  willing.  29 
But  afterwards  he  repented  and  went,    (80)  And  80 
he  came  to  the  other,  and  said  the  same  to  him. 
And  he  answered  and  said :  I  [go],  my  lord ;  but 
did  not  go.     (81)  Which  of  these  two  performed  81 
the  pleasure  of  his  father?    They  say  to  him,  The 
first    Jesus  said  to  them:  Venly  I  say  to  you, 
That  publicans  and  harlots  go  berore  you  into  the 
kingdom  of  God.     (82)  For  John  came  to  you  in  82 
the  way  of  righteousness,™  and  ye  believed  him 
not;  but  the  publicans  and  harlots  believed  him: 
and  ye,  after  ye  had  seen  [it],  did  not  eveu  then 
repent  and  believe  in  him.    (38)  Hear  ye  another  88 
similitude.  *»     A  certain  man,  the  lord  of  a  house, 
planted  a  vineyard,  and  inclosed  it  with  a  hedge, 
and  digged  in  it  a  wine-press,  and  built  a  tower  in 
it,  and  leased  it  to  cultivators,  and  removed  to  a 
distance.     (84)  And  when  the  time  for  the  fruits  84 
arrived,  he  sent  his  servants  to  the  cultivators, 
that  they  might  remit  to  him  of  the  fruits  of  the 
vineyard.    (35)  And  the  cultivators  laid  hold  of  85 
his  servants,  and  beat  one,  and  stoned  another, 
and  one  they  slew.     (86)   And  again   he    sent  86 
other  servants,  more  numerous  than  the  first ;  and 
they  did  the  like  to  them.    (87)  And  at  last  he  sent  87 
to  them  his  son :   for  he  said.  Perhaps  they  will 
respect  my  son.     (88)  But  the  cultivators,  when  88 
they  saw  the  son,  said  among  themselves :  This  is 
the  heir:  Gome;  let  us  kill  him,  and  retain  his 
inheritance.     (89)  And  they  laid  hold   of  him,  89 
thrust  him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew  him. 

(40)  When  the  lord  of  the  vineyard,  therefore,  40 
'  ail  come ;  what  will  he  do  to  those  cultivators  r 

(41)  They  say  to  him:  He  will  utterly®  destroy  41 
them ;  and  will  lease  the  vineyard  to  other  culti- 
vators, who  will  render  him  the  fruits  in  their 
seasons.    (42)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Have  ye  never  42 
read  in  the  scripture.  The  stone  which  the  builders 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXII. 


48 


Sy. 

or,  scatter  him 
in  particles. 

*  or,  parables. 


rejected,  hath  becx)me  the  head  of  the  comer:  this 

IS  from  the  Lord;  and  it  is  marvellous  in  our  eyes? 

48  (43)  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  That  the  kingdom  of 

God  shall  be  taken  from  you,  and  shall  be  given 

44  to  a  people  that  will  yield  fruits.?  (44)  And  who- 
ever shall  fall  upon  this  stone,  will  be  fractured; 
but  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fall,  it  will  crush  him 

45  to  atoms? '  (45)  And  when  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees  had  heard  his  similitudes,*  tney  under- 

46  stood  that  he  spoke  in  reference  to  them.  (46)  And 
they  sought  to  apprehend  him,  but  were  afraid 
of  the  multitude,  because  they  accoxmted  him  as  a 
prophet. 

XXTT.  And  Jesus  answered  again  by  similitudes,* 
2  and  said:   (2)  The  kingdom  of  heaven  is  like  to  •  or, parablei. 

a  royal  person,  who  made  a  feast*>  for  his  son. 
8  (3)  And  he  sent  his  servants  to  call  those  that  **  or,  marriagB^ 

had  been  invited,  to  the  feast :  and  they  would  not   fa^*^ 

4  come.  (4)  And  again  he  sent  other  servants,  and 
said :  Tell  those  invited.  Behold,  my  entertainment 
is  prepared,  my  oxen  and  my  fatungs  are  slain, 
and  every  thing  is  prepared ;  come  ye  to  the  feast 

5  (5)  But  thCT  diowed  contempt,  and  went  away, 
one  to  his  mrm,  and  another  to  his  merchandise: 

6  (6)  and  the  rest  seized  his  servants,  and  abused 

7  them,  and  slew  them.  (7)  And  when  the  king 
heard  [of  it],  he  was  angry ;  and  he  sent  his  military 
forces,*^  and  destroyed  mose  murderers,  and  burned  •  or,  hi$ 

8  their  city.  (8)  Then  said  he  to  his  servants,  The 
feast  is  prepared,  but  they  who  were  invited  were 

9  unworthy.  (9)  Go  ye  therefore  to  the  termina- 
tions of  the  streets;  and  as  many  as  ye  find,  bid 

10  to  the  feast.  (10)  And  those  servants  went  out 
into  the  streets,  and  collected  all  the^  foxm4,  both 
bad  and  good ;  and  the  place  of  feastmg**  was  filled  ^  Sy.  AaS 

11  with  guests.    (11^  And  the  king  went  in  to  see  ^ZcAaIo 
the  guests:  and  ne  saw  there  a  man  who  was  not 

12  clad  in  the  festal  garments.  (12)  And  he  said  to 
him :  My  friend,  how  camest  thou  here  without  the 

18  festal  robes?  But  he  was  silent.  (13)  Then  said  the 
king  to  the  servitors :  Bind  his  hands  and  his  feet, 
and  cast  him  into  the  outer®  darkness :  there  will  •  or,  outside. 

14  be  weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth.  (14)  For  the 
called  are  many,  and  the  chosen  are  few. 

16      Then  went  the  Pharisees  and  took  counsel,  how 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^ 


MATTHEW,   XXII. 


'  Sy.  'jAV^^ 

«  Sy.  AjjDJ 
J]0)05ai 

hay  /jlg^VVi 


»Sy. 
kSy.^LSilSD 


^Sy. 


™  or,  might, 
abUiiy. 


'^Sy. 

Oil  g^Noa 

<»  Sy.  IcDQSqJ, 
Gr.  vofjuof. 

pSy.]ig^\V) 


they  might  ensnare  him  in  discoursed'    (16)  And  16 
they  sent  to  him  their  disciples,  with  domestics  of 
Herod,«  and  said  to  him:  Teacher, ^  we  know  that 
thou  art  veracious,  and  teachest  the  way  of  God 
with  truth,  regardless  of  man,  for  thou  hast  no 
respect  of  persons.     (17)  Tell  us,  therefore,  how  17 
dotn  it  appear  to  thee :  is  it  lawful  to  pay  capita- 
tion rnoney  to  Caesar,  or  not?  (18)  But  Jesus  Imew  18 
their  wickedness,  and  said:  Why  tempt  ye  me, 
ye  hypocrites?    (19)  Show  me  a  denarius  of  the  19 
capitation  money.    And  they  brought  to  him  a 
denarius.     (20)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Whose  20 
is  this  image  and  inscription?     (21)   They  say,  21 
Caesar's.     He  saith  to  them:    Give  then  Caesar's 
things  to  Caesar,  and  God's  things  to  God.    (22)  22 
And  when  they  heard  [it]  they  were  surprised : 
and  they  left  him,  and  went  away. 

The  same  day  came  Sadducees,  and  said  to  him :  23 
There  is  no  life  of  the  dead.*   And  they  questioned 
him,  (24)  and  said  to  him :  Teacher  ;k  Moses  com-  24 
manded  us,  that  if  a  man  should  die  childless,  his 
brother  must  take  his  wife  and  raise  up  seed  to 
his  brother.     (26)  Now  there  were  with  us  seven  25 
brothers.    The  first  took  a  wife,  and  deceased;  and, 
as  he  had  no  children,  he  left  his  wife  to  his  bro- 
ther.   (26)  In  like  manner  also  the  second,  and  26 
the  third,  and  up  to  the  whole  seven.    (27)  And  27 
after  them  all,  the  woman  also  herself  died.    (28)  28 
In  the  resurrection,!  therefore,  to  which  of  those 
seven  will  she  be  the  wife  ?    For  they  all  had  taken 
her?    (29)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:  Ye  29 
do  err,  from  not  knowing  the  scriptures,  nor  the 
power  m  of  God.  (30)  For  in  the  resurrection  of  the  80 
dead,  they  do  not  take  wives,  nor  are  wives  given 
to  husbands ;  but  they  are  as  the  angels  of  God  in 
heaven.     (31)  But  as  to  the  resurrection  of  the  dead,  81 
have  ye  not  read  what  was  spoken  to  you  by  God, 
who  said:   (32)  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  82 
God  of  Isaac,  the  God  of  Jacob  ?    Now  he  is  not 
the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.    (33)  And  88 
when  the  multitude  heard  [it]  they  were  astonished 
at  his  doctrine.^ 

And  when  the  Pharisees  heard  that  he  had  put  84 
the  Sadducees  to  silence,  they  assembled  together ; 
(35)  and  one  of  them,  who  was  expert  in  the  law,®  85 
to  tempt  him,  inquired:  (86)  Teacher,?  which  is  the  86 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXIIL 


46 


87  great  command  in  the  law  ?«  (87)  Jesus  sivid  to  him: 
Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  uod,  with  all  thy  heart 
and  with  all  thy  souL  and  with  all  thy  might,*  ana 

88  with  all  thy  mind.t    (88J   This  is  the  great  and  first 

89  command.     (89)  And  tne  second,  wmch  is  like  it, 

40  is,  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyselfi  (40) 
On  these  two  commands  hang  the  law^  and  the 

41  prophets.     (41)   And  while  the  Pharisees  were 

42  assembled,  Jesus  questioned  them,  (42)  and  said: 
What  say  ve  respecting  the  Messiah?  Whose  son 
is   he?     They  say  to   him;  The   son  of  David. 

48  (48)  He  saith  to  them :  How  then  doth  David,  by 

44  the  Spirit,  call  hun  Lord?  for  he  said:  (44). The 
Lord  said  to  my  Lord,  Seat  thyself  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  place  thv  enemies  under  thy  feet 

45  (46)  K  David  then  call  him  Lord,  how  is  he  his 

46  son?  f46)  And  no  one  was  able  to  give  him  an 
answer  r  And  from  that  day,  no  one  dared  to 
question  him. 

KXTTT.  Then  Jesus  conversed  with  the  multitude 
2  and   with  his  disciples,    (2)  and  said  to  them: 

The  Scribes  and  Pharisees  sit  in  the  seat  of  Moses. 
8  (8)  Whatever  therefore  they  tell  you  to  observe, 

that  observe  and  do.    But  according  to  their  deeds, 

4  practise  ye  not:  for  they  say,  and  do  not  (4) 
They  tie  up  heavy  burdens,  and  lay  [them]  on 
men's  shoulders;   but  will  not  themselves  touch 

5  them  with  their  finger.  (5)  And  all  their  works 
they  do,  to  be  seen  of  men :  for  they  make  their 
phylacteries*  broad,  and  extend  the  fringes**  of 

6  their  garments.  (6)  And  they  love  the  nighest 
couches  at  suppers,®  and  the  nighest  seats  in  the 

7  synagogues,  (t)  and  the  greeting  in  the  market 
places,  and  to  be  addressed  by  men  with  Eabbi.<> 

8  (8)  But  be  not  ye  called  Eabbi ;   for  one  is  your 

9  Rabbi,  and  ye  are  all  brethren.  (9)  And  ye  shall 
not  call  yourselves  Father®  on  earth ;  for  one  is 
your  Father,  who  is  in  heaven.  (10)  And  be  ye 
not  called  guides:^  for  one  is  your  Guide,  tne 
Messiah.  (11)  And  the  great  one  among  you  will 
be  your  servitor.g  (12)  For  whoever  shall  exalt 
himself,  will  be  abased :  and  whoever  shall  abase 
himself  will  be  exalted. 

18  Woe  to  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites: 
for  ye  devour  the  houses  of  widows,  under  the  dis- 


10 

11 
12 


r  Sy.  ^fiDOlOJ, 
Gr.  vo/xof. 

•  or,  strength. 

*  or,  reason, 

'  Sy.  lA^Jol, 
the  Pentateuch. 


•  Sy. 

"  Sy.  lAlSZ 
«  or,  dinners. 
^  Sy.  o-OJ 

•  Sy  H 

Lat.  duces 

t  Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


46 


MATTHEW,   XXIIl. 


^Bj.a  debtor. 


^  Sy.  a  ddOar, 


m  gy,  ^ftfV^Vrfcl 


Sy. 


guiae  of  protracting  your  prayers.     Therefore  ye 
shall  receive  greater  condemnation.     (14)  Woe  to  14 
you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for  ye  hold 
the  kingdom  of  heaven  closed  before  men ;  for  ye 
enter  not  yourselves,  and  those  that  would  enter 
ye  suffer  not  to  enter.    (15)  Woe  to  you,  Scribes  16 
and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for  ye  traverse  sea  and 
land  to  make  one  proselyte  ;^  and  when  he  is  gain* 
ed,  ye  make  him  a  child  of  hell*  twofold  more 
than  yourselves.  (16)  Woe  to  you,  ye  blind  guides:  16 
for  ye  say,  Whoever  shall  swear  by  the  temple,  it 
is  nothing;  but  whoever  shall  swear  bv  the  gold 
that  is  in  the  temple,  he  is  holden.^    (17)  Ye  fools,  17 
and  blind :  for  which  is  greater,  the  gold,  or  the 
temple  that  sanctifieth  the  gold?     (18)  And,  who-  18 
ever  shall  swear  by  the  altar,  it  is  nothing :  but 
whoever  shall  swear  bv  the  oblation  upon  it,  he  is 
holden.*     (19)  Ye  fools,  and  blind:  for  which  is  19 
greater,  the  oblation,  or  the  altar  that  sanctifieth 
the  oblation?     (20)  He  therefore  who  sweareth  by  20 
the  altar,  sweareth  by  it,  and  by  all  that  is  upon  it 
(21])  And  he  who  sweareth  by  the  temple,  sweareth  21 
by  it,  and  by  him  that  dwelleth  in  it.     (22)  And  22 
he  who  sweareth   by  heaven,  sweareth   oy  the 
throne  of  God,  and  by  him  that  sitteth  on  it.     (28)  23 
Woe  to  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for 
ye  tithe  mint,  and  anise,  and  cummin,  and  omit 
the  graver  [matters]  of  the  law,°»  judgment,  and 
mercy,  and  fidelity:  these  ought  ye  to  do,  and 
those  not  to  omit.     (24)  Ye  blind  guides,  who  24 
strain  out  gnats,  and  swallow  down  camels.    (26)  25 
Woe  to  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites:  for 
ye  cleanse  the  outside  of  the  cup  and  the  dish, 
while  within  they  are  full  of  rapine  and  wicked- 
ness.    (26)  Ye  blind  Pharisees,  cleanse  first  the  26 
inside  of  the  cup  and  dish,  that  their  outside  may 
be  clean  also.  (27)  Woe  to  you.  Scribes  and  Phan-  27 
sees,  hypocrites :  for  ye  are  like  whited  sepulchres, 
which  appear  comely  without,  but  are  within  full 
of  bones  of  the  deadf  and  all  impurity.    (28)  So  ye  28 
also,  outwardly,  appear  to  men  as  righteous ;»  but 
within,  ye  are  full  of  iniquity  and  hypocrisy.     (29)  29 
Woe  to  you,  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites :  for 
ye  build  the  tombs  of  the  prophets,  and  ye  adorn 
the  sepulchres  of  the  righteous;  (80)  and  ye  say:  80 
If  we  had  been  in  the  days  of  our  fathers,  we 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXIV. 


47 


Sy. 


would  not  have  been  participators  with  them  in 

SI  the  blood  of  the  prophets.    (81)  Wherefore  ye 

are  witnesses,  against  yourselves,  that  ye  are  the 

82  children  of  them  that  killed  the  propnets.  (82) 
And  as  for  yon,  fill  ye  up  the  measure  of  your 

83  fethers.    (88)  Ye  serpents,  ye  race  of  vipers:  how 
34  can  ye  escape  the  condemnation  of  hdl?®    (84^ 

Wherefore,  Dehold,  I  send  unto  you  prophets,  ana 
wise  men,  and  scribes;  some  of  whom  ye  will  kill 
and  crucify,  and  some  of  them  ye  will  scourge  in 
your  synagogues,  and  will  persecute  them  from 
85  city  to  city:  (36)  so  that  on  you  may  come  all  the 
blood  of  the  righteous,  which  hath  been  shed  on 
the  earth,  fix)m  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel  unto 
the  blood  of  Zachariah,P  son  of  Barachiah,  whom  p  Sy. 

36  y^  slew  between  the  temple  and- the  altar.    (86)    -o   Ufr^l? 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  that  all  these  things  will  LotS 

37  come  upon  this  generation.  (87)  O  Jerusalem, 
Jerusalem,  who  lollest  the  prophets,  and  stonest 
them  that  are  sent  to  thee :  how  often  would  I 
have  gathered  thy  children,  as  a  hen  gathereth 
her  young  under  her  wings,  and  ye  would  not. 

38  (38^  Behold,  your  house  is  left  to  you  desolate ! 

39  (39)  For  I  say  to  you,  That  ye  shall  not  see  me 
henceforth,  until  ye  shall  say :  Blessed  is  he  that 
Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

XXTV.    And  Jesus  passed  out  of  the  temple  to  go 

away :  and  his  disciples  came  to  him,  showing  hun  ■  Sy.  oHjlX^ 
2  the  structure*  of  the  temple.  (2)  And  he  said 
to  them:  See  ye  not  all  these?  Verily  I  say  to 
you,  There  will  not  be  left  here  a  stone  upon  a 
8  stone,  that  is  not  demolished.  (8)  And  as  Jesus 
sat  on  the  mount  of  Olives,  his  disciples  came,  and 
said  between  themselves  and  him :  Tell  us  when 
these  things  are  to  be ;  and  what  will  be  the  sim 
of  thy  comina*>  and  of  the  consummation  of  the 

4  world.*^    (4)  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them: 

5  Take  heed,  that  no  one  deceive  you.  (5)  For 
many  will  come  in  my  name,  and  will  say,  I  am 

6  the  Messiah:  and  they  will  deceive  many.  {&) 
And  ye  are  to  hear  of  conflicts,  and  the  rumor  or 
battles.  See  that  ye  be  not  disquieted:  for  all 
these  things  must  come ;  but  the  consummation  is 

7  not  yet  (7)  For  nation  will  rise  against  nation, 
and  *kiiigdom  against  kingdom ;  and  there  will  be 


^  Sy.  ^A^Zllo 
Sy.]loV^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


48 


MATTHEW,   XXI\. 


B  Sy.  ]^\v 
f  Sy.  ]Sn\o  • 


famines,  and  pestilences,  and  earthquakes  in  divers 
places.    (8)  6ut  all  these  are  only  the  commence-    8 
ment  of  sorrows.     (9)  And  they  will  deliver  you    9 
up  to  tribulation,  and  will  kill  you:  and  ye  win  be 
hated  by  all  nations,  on  account  of  my  name.    (10)  10 
Then  many  will  be  stumbled :  and  they  will  hate 
one  another,  and  will  betray  one  another.    (11)  11 
And  many  false  prophets  will  rise  up ;  and  they 
will  deceive  many.    (12^  And  on  account  of  the  12 
abounding  of  iniquity,  tne  love  of  many  will  de- 
cline.   (13^  But  he  that  shall  persevere  to  the  end,  IS 
will  have  life.^     Q4)  And  this  announcement  of  14 
the  kingdom  shall  be  published  in  all  the  world,® 
for  a  testimony  to  all  nations:  and  then  will  come 
the  consummation.^    (15)  And  when  ye  see  the  15 
abominable  sign  of  desolation,  which  was  spoken 
of  by  Daniel  the  prophet,  standing  in  the  holy 
place ;  then  let  the  reaaer  consider ;  (16)  and  then  16 
let  them  who  are  in  Judaea,  flee  to  the  mountain : 
(17)   and  let  him  who  is  on  the  roof,  not  come  17 
down  to  take  what  is  in  his  house :  (18)  and  let  18 
him  who  is  in  the  field,  not  return  bacfc  to  take 
his  clothing.  (19)  But  woe  to  those  with  child,  and  19 
to  them  that  are  nursing,  in  those  days.     (20)  And  20 
pray  ye,  that  your  flight  be  not  in  winter,  or  on 
the  sabbath.     (21)  For  there  will  then  be  great  21 
distress,  such  as  hath  not  been  from  the  commence- 
ment of  the  world,  sr  until  now,  and  will  not  be. 
(22)  And  unless  those  days  should  be  cut  short,  no  22 
flesh  would  remain  alive.**     But,  for  the  elect's 
sake,  those  days  will  be  cut  short.    (28)  Then,  if  23 
any  one  shall  say  to  you,  Lo,  the  Messiah  is  here, 
or  is  there ;  give  no  credence.     (24)  For  there  will  24 
arise  false  Messiahs,  and  mendacious  prophets ;  who 
will  exhibit  great  signs,  so  as  to  deceive,  if  possible, 
even  the  elect     (25)  Behold,  I  have  told  you  25 
beforehand.     (26)   If  therefore  they  say  to  you,  26 
Behold,  he  is  in  the  desert;    go   not  out;    or, 
Behold,  he  is  in  a  secret  chamber;  give  no  credence. 
(27)  As  the  lightning  cometh  out  of  the  east,  and  27 
shineth  unto  the  west,  so  will  be  the  coming  of  the 
Son  of  man.     (28)  And  wherever  the  carcass  may  28 
be,  there  will  the  eagles  be  congregated.   (29)  And  29 
immediately  after  the  distress  of  those  days,  the 
sun  will  be  darkened,  and  the  moon  will  not  show 
her  light,  and  the  stars  will  fall  from  heaven,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXIV. 


4V 


30  the  powers*  of  heaven  will  be  agitated.  (80)  And 
then  will  be  seen  the  signal^  of  the  Son  of  man  in 
heaven :  and  then  will  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth 
mourn,  when^  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  on 
the  clouds  of  heaven,  with  power  and  ^eat  glory. 

31  (31)  And  he  will  send  his  angels  with  a  great 
trumpet,  and  they  will  collect  together  his  elect 
from  the  four  winds,  from  one  extremity  of  heaven 

32  to  the  other.  (32)  And  learn  y6  an  illustration"* 
from  the  fig-tree.  As  soon  as  its  branches  become 
tender  and  its  leaves  shoot  forth,  ye  know  that 

33  summer  is  coming  on.  (33)  So  also  ye,  when  ye 
perceive  all  these  things,  know  ye,  that  he  is  nigh 

34  [even]  at  the  door.  (34)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That 
this  generation^  shall  not  pass  away,  till  all  these 

35  things  shall  be.     (35)  Heaven  and  earth  will  pass 

36  away ;  but  my  words®  shall  not  pass  away.  (36) 
But  of  that  day  and  of  that  hour,  knoweth  no  inan, 
nor  even  the  angels  of  heaven,  but  the  Father  only. 

37  (37)  And  as  the  days  of  Noah,  so  will  the  coming 

38  of  the  Son  of  man  be.  (38)  For  as,  before  the 
flood,?  they  were  eating  and  drinking,  taking 
wives  and  giving  to  husbands,  up  to  the  day  that 

39  Noah  entered  the  ark,'  (39)  and  knew  not,  until 
the  flood  came  and  took  tnem  all  awayj  so  will 

40  the  coming  of  the  Son  of  man  be.  (40)  Then  will 
two  [men]  be  in  the  field ;  the  one  will  be  taken, 

41  and  the  other  left  (41)  Two  [women]  will  be 
grinding  at  the  mill ;  the  one  taken,  and  the  other 

42  left.    (42)  Watch,  therefore,  since  ye  know  not  at 

43  what  hour  your  Lord  cometh.  (43)  But  know 
this,  that  if  the  lord"  of  the  house  had  known  in 
what  watch  the  thief  would  come,  he  would  have 
been  awake,  and  would  not  have  sufiered  his  house 

44  to  be  broken  into.  (44)  Therefore,  be  ye  also 
ready ;  for  at  an  hour  ye  do  not  expect,  the  Son  of 

45  man  will  come.  (45)  Who  then,  is  that  faithful 
and  wise  servant,  whom  his  lord  hath  placed  over 
his  domestics,*  to  give  them  their  food  in  its  time? 

46  (46)  Happy  is  that  servant,  whom,  when  his  lord 

47  shall  come,  he  will  find  so  doing.  (47)  Verily  I 
say  to  you.  He  will  place  him  over  all  that  he  hath. 

48  (48)  But  if  that  servant,  being  wicked,  shall  say  in 

49  his  heart.  My  lord  delayeth  his  coming ;  (49)  and 
shall  begin  to  beat  his  fellow-servants,  and  shall  be 

50  eating  and  drinking  with  drunkards ;  (50)  the  lord 


'  or,  armtes. 


Sy. 


or,  ofiiAiy 
wUL 


Sy.  lZ)k> 


•  or,  race, 
Sy.  ulI:^ 

Sy.  )]ao 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


50 


MATTHEW,   XXV. 


•  Sy.  likened  to. 


"  or,  power. 
°   or,  others. 


of  that  servant  will  come  in  a  day  he  will  not  ex- 
pect, and  in  an  hour  he  knoweth  not,  (51)  and  will  61 
cut  him  asunder,  and  will  assign  him  his  portion 
with  the  hypocrites:   there  wm  be  weeping  and 
gnashing  of  teetL 

Then   may   the   kingdom   of  heaven   be  XXV. 
shadowed*  forth  by  ten  virgins,  who  took  their 
lamps  and  went  out  to  meet  the  bridegroom  and 
bride.    (2)  And  five  of  them  were  wise,  and  five    2 
were  foolish.      (8)   And   the  foolish  took  their    3 
lamps,  but  took  no  oil  with  them.    (4)  But  the    4 
wise  took  oil  in  vessels,  with  their  lamps.    (5)  And    5 
while  the  bridegroom  delayed,  they  all  became 
sleepy  and  fell  asleep.    (6)  And  at  midnight  there    6 
was  an  outcry:  Behold,  the  bridegroom  cometh; 
go  ye  out  to  meet  him.    (7)  Then  all  those  virgins    7 
arose,  and  trimmed  their  lamps.     (8)  And  the    8 
foolish  said  to  the  wise :  Give  us  of  your  oil ;  for, 
behold,  our  lamps  have  gone  out    (9)  The  wise    9 
answered  and  said:  [We  must  refuse,]  lest  there 
should  not  be  enough  for  us  and  for  you :  but  go 
ye  to  them  that  sell,  and  buy  for  yourselves. 
(10)  And  while  they  went  to  buy,  the  oridegroom  10 
came;  and  they  that  were  ready,  went  with  him 
into  the  house  of  the  nuptials,  and  the  door  was 
shut.     (11)  And  at  length  came  also  the  other  11 
virgins,  and  said:  Our  lord,  our  lord,  open  to  us. 
(12)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  them:  Verily  12 
I  say  to  you,  I  know  you  not.     (13)  Watch,  there-  13 
fore,  seemg  ye  know  not  the  day  nor  the  hour. 
(14)  For,  as  a  man  that  took  a  journey,  called  his  14 
servants  and    delivered    to   them  his  property: 
(15j)  to  one  he  gave  five  talents;  to  anotner,  two;  15 
ana  to  another,  one:  to  each,  according  to  his 
ability  :*>  and  he  immediately  departed.    (16)  Then  16 
he  that  received  five  talents,  went  and  traded  with 
them,  and  gained  five  more.c     (17)  And  likewise  17 
the  one  of  two  [talents],  by  trading  gained  two 
more.     (18)  But  ne  that  received  one,  went  and  18 
digged  in  the  earth,  and  hid  his  lord's  money. 

(19)  And  after  a  long  time,  the  lord  of  those  sei-  19 
vants  came,   and  received   account    fi:om  them. 

(20)  And  he  who  had  received  the  five  talents,  20 
came  and  brought  five  others ;  and  said.  My  lord, 
thou  gavest  me  five  talents ;  behold,  I  have  gained 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW.   XXV. 


51 


21  by  trading  five  more  to  them.  (21)  His  lord  said 
to  him:  Well  donel^  good  and  faithftd  servant: 
thou  hast  been  faithftd  with  a  little;  I  will  set 
thee  over  much:  enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy 

22  lord.  (22)  And  he  of  the  two  talents  came,  and 
said:  My  lord,  thou  gavest  me  two  talents;  be- 
hold, I  have  by  trading  gained  two  more  to  them. 

23  (23)  His  lord  said  to  him :  Well  done  I  good  and 
:&itnful  servant:  thou  hast  been  fidthful  with  a 
little ;  I  will  set  thee  over  much :  enter  thou  into 

24  the  joy  of  thy  lord.  (24)  And  he  also  Ihat  re- 
ceived the  one  talent,  came  and  said :  My  lord,  I 
knew  thee,  that  thou  art  a  hard  man,  reaping 
where  thou  hast  not  sowed,  and  gathering  wnere 

25  thou  hast  not  scattered ;  (25)  and  I  was  afraid,  and 
I  went  and  hid  thy  talent  m  the  earth.    Behold, 

26  thou  hast  what  is  thine.  (26)  His  lord  answered, 
and  said  to  him:  Wicked  and  slothful  servant! 
Thou  knewest  me,  that  I  reap  where  I  have  not 
sowed,  and  gather  where  I  have  not  scattered  I 

27  (27)  Thou  oughtest  to  have  cast  my  money  into 
the  exchange;®  and  I  mi^ht  have  come  and  de- 

28  manded  my  property  with  its  interest.^  (28)  Take 
therefore  the  talent  from  him,  and  give  it  to  him 

29  that  hath  ten  talents.  (29)  For,  to  him  that  hath, 
shall  be  given,  and  he  shall  have  more ;  but  from 
him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he  halh  shall  be 

80  taken  away.  (30)  And  cast  ye  the  unprofitable 
servant  into  the  outer  darkness:  there  will  be 
weeping  and  gnashing  of  teeth. 

81  And  when  the  Son  of  man  shall  come  in  his 
glory,  and  all  his  holy  angels  with  him,  then  will 

82  he  sit  upon  the  throne  of  his  glorjr.  (82)  And 
before  mm  will  be  gathered  all  nations;  and  he 
will  separate  them  one  from  another,  as  a  shepherd 

83  severeth  the  sheep  from  the  goats.  (33)  And  he 
wUl  place  the  sheep  on  his  right  hand,  and  the 

84  goats  on  his  left;.  (34)  Then  will  the  king  say  to 
those  on  his  right  hand :  Come,  ye  blessed  of  my 
Father;  inherit  the  kingdom  that  was  prepared  for 

85  you  from  the  foundation  of  the  world.?  (35)  For  I 
was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  food ;  I  was  thirsty, 
*^^d  ye  gave  me  (frink ;  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye 

86  took  me  home ;  (36)  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed 
me;   I  was  sick,  and  ye  visited  me;   I  was  in 

87  prison,^*  and  ye  came  to  me.    (37)  Then  will  the 


Sy.  aJ\  1 
But 


•  Sy.  ]ioL^ 
Sy.oi^lo! 


f  Sv.  ]^^^^ 


^  or,  houm  €f 


Digitized  by 


Google 


52 


MATTHEW,   XXVL 


Sy.ViNsN? 

'  Sy. 


'Sy.ln 


^JL.Z 


soNsSi 


"Sy.    Xij^ 


*Sy.  ]»»  ,^ 


righteous  say  to  him:  Our  Lord,  when  saw  we 
thee  hungry,  and  fed  thee?  or  thirsty,  and  gave 
thee  drink?     (88^    And  when  saw'  we  thee  a  88. 
stranger,   and  toot  thee  home?   or  naked,  and 
clothed  thee?    (89)  And  when  saw  we  thee  sick,  39 
or  in  prison,  and  came  to  thee?    (40)  And  the  40 
king  will  answer,  and  say  to  them;  Verily  I  say 
to  you,  That  inasmuch  as  ye  did  so  to  one  of  these 
my  little  brothers,  ye  did  so  to  me.     (41)  Then  will  41 
he  say  al30  to  them  on  his  left  hand:  Go  from 
me,  ye  accursed,  into  everlasting*  fire,  which  was 
prepared  for  the  Calumniator^   and    his  angels. 
^42)  For  I  was  hungry,  and  ye  gave  me  no  food ;  42 
and  I  was  thirsty,  and  ye  gave  me  no  drink; 
(43)  and  I  was  a  stranger,  and  ye  took  me  not  43 
home;  and  I  was  naked,  and  ye  clothed  me  not; 
and  I  was  sick  and  in  prison,  and  ye  did  not  visit 
me.    (44)  Then  will  they  also  answer  and  say:  44 
Our  Lord,  when  saw  we  thee  hungry,  or  thirsty, 
or  a  stranger,  or  naked,  or  sick,  or  in  prison,  and 
did  not  minister  to  thee?     (45)  Then  will  he  an-  45 
swer,  and  say  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  vou,  That 
inasmuch  as  ye  did  not  so  to  one  of  these  little 
ones,  ye  did  not  so  to  me.    (46)  And  these  will  go  46 
into  everlasting  torment,^  and  the  righteous  into 
everlasting  life.™ 

And  it  came  to  pass,  when  Jesus  had  con-  XXVL 
eluded  all  these  discourses,  that  he  said  to  his  dis- 
ciples: (2)  Ye  know  that  after  two  days  is  the    2 
passover;^  and  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  to  be 
crucified.     (8)  Then  assembled  the  chief  priests    8 
and  the  Scribes  and  the  Elders  of  the  people,  at  the 
hall  of  the  high  priest,  who  was  called  Caiaphas.** 
(4)  And  they  held  a  counsel  against  Jesus,  that  they    4 
might  take  him  by  guile,  and  kill  hinu    (5)  But    5 
they  said :  Not  on  the  festival  lest  there  be  a  com- 
motion among  the  people.     (6)  And  when  Jesus    6 
was  at  Bethany,  in  the  house  of  Simon  the  leper, 
(7)  there  came  to  him  a  woman  having  a  vase  of     7 
aromatic  ointment  very  precious,  and  she  poured  it 
on  the  head  of  Jesus  as  he  was  reclining.    (8)  And    8 
when  his  disciples  saw  [it]  they  were  displeased, 
and  said:  Why  is  this  waste?    (9)  For  this  [oint-     9 
ment]  might  have  been  sold  for  much,  and  nave 
been  given  to  the  poor.     (10)  But  Jesus  knew  10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXVI. 


53 


[their  dissatisfaction],   and  said  to  them:   Why 
trouble  ye  the  woman?  She  hath  performed  a 

11  good  deed  towards  me.  (11)  For  the  poor  ye 
have  at  all  times  with  you ;  but  I  am  not  with  you 

12  always.  (12)  And  this  her  act,  pouring  the  oint- 
ment on  my  body,  she  hath  done  as  it  were  for  my 

18  burial.  (13)  Venly  I  say  to  you.  That  wherever 
this  my  gospel®  shall  be  proclaimed,  in  all  the 
world,  (^  this  thing  that  she  nath  done  shall  be  told 
for  a  memorial  of  her. 

14  Then  one  of  the  twelve,  named  Judas  Iscariot, 

15  went  to  the  chief  priests,  (15)  and  said  to  them : 
What  will  ye  give  me,  if  I  will  deliver  him  to  you? 
And  they  promised  him  thirty  pieces  of  silver. 

16  (16)  And  from  that  time  he  sought  opportunity  to 

17  betray  him.  (17)  And  on  the  first  day  of  unleav- 
ened bread,  the  disciples  came  to  Jesus,  and  said 
to  him :  Wliere  wilt  mou  that  we  prepare  for  thee 

18  to  eal  the  passover?  (18)  And  he  said  to  them: 
Go  ye  into  the  city,  to  such®  a  man,  and  say  to 
him :  Our  Eabbi  saith.  My  time  approaches :  with 
thee  will  I  keep  the  passover  with  my  disciples. 

19  (19)  And  his  (Msciples  did  as  Jesus  directed  them, 

20  and  made  ready  the  passover.  (20)  And  when  it 
was  evening,  he  reclined  with  his  twelve  discioles. 

21  (21)  And  as  they  were  eating,  he  said:  Verily  I 
say  to  you.   That  one  of  you  will  betray  me. 

22  (22)  And  it  troubled  them  much.  And  they 
began  each  one  of  them  to  say  to  him;  My  Lord, 

28  is  it  I?  (28)  And  he  answered  and  said:  One 
that  dippetJi  his  hand  with  me  in  the  dish,  he  will 

24  betray  me.  (24)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it 
is  written  of  him:  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom 
the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed.  It  would  have  been 
better  for^hat  man,  it  he  had  not  been  bom. 

25  (25J  Judas  the  betrayer  answered  and  said:  Eabbi, 
is  it  I?      Jesus  said  to  him:   Thou  hast  said. 

26  (26)  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread, 
and  blessed,  and  brake ;  and  gave  to  his  disciples, 

27  and  said:  Take,  eat;  this  is  my  body.f  (27)  And 
he  took  the  cup,  and  offered  tlianks ;  and  gave  [it] 
to  thena,  saying :  Take,  drink  of  this  all  of  you. 

28  (28)  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new  testament,?  which, 
in  behalf  of  many,  is  shed  for  the  remission  of  sins. 

29  (^9)  But  I  say  to  you,  that  I  will  henceforth  not 
drink  of  this  product^  of  the  vine,  until  the  day  in 


Sy 


sy-r^ 


'Sy, 
»  Sy. 
*Sy 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54 


MATTHEW,   XXVL 


'   or,  stumbled. 


^  Gr.  Peter. 


iSy.^iQDO^ 


'Sy.  uuA.^J 


°Sy.  U»05 


*  Qj.  npoke. 


83 


which  I  shall  drink  it  with  you  new  in  the  king- 
dom of  God. 

And  they  sang  praises,  and  went  forth  to  the  SO 
mount  of  Olives.    (81)  Then  said  Jesus  to  them:  81 
Ye  will  all  be  offended*  in  me  this  night ;  for  it  is 
written,  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  the  sheep 
of  his  flock  will  be  dispersed.     (82)  But  after  I  am 
arisen,  I  will  go  before  you  into  Galilee.    (88)  Oe- 
phas^  replied,  and  said  to  him:   Though  all  men 
should  be  offended  in  thee,  I  will  never  be  offended 
in  thee.     (84)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Verily  I  say  to  84 
thee.  That  this  night,  before  the  cock  crow,  thou 
wilt  thrice  deny  me.    (86)  Cephas  said  to  him :  If  85 
I  were  to  die  with  thee,  I  would  not  deny  thee: 
and  so  also  said  all  the  disciples. 

Then  came  Jesus  with  them  to  a  place  called  36 
Gethsemane:*  and  he  said  to  his  disciples.  Sit  ye 
here,  while  I  go  and  prav.     (37)  And  he  took  (5e-  87 
phas  and  the  two  sons  of  Zebedee,  and  began  to  be 
dejected  and  sorrowfiil.     (38)  And  he   said   to  88 
them:  There  is  anguish  in  my  soul,™  even  unto 
death.     Wait  for  me  here;  and  watch  with  me. 
(39)  And  retiring  a  little,  he  fell  on  his  face,  and  89 
prayed,  and  said :  My  Father,  if  it  can  be  so,  let 
this  cup  pass  from  me.     Yet  not  as  I  choose,  but 
as  thou.     (40)   And  he  came  to  his  disciples,  and  40 
found  them  asleep:  and  he  said  to  Cephas:   Sol 
could  ye  not  watch  with  me  one  hour?    (41)  Wake  41 
ye,  and  pray,  lest  ye  fall  into  temptation.    The 
mind"    is    prepared,    but    the    body    is    infirm, 

(42)  Again  he  went  awav  the  second  time,  and  42 
prayed,  and  said :  My  Father,  if  it  cannot  be  that 
this  cup  pass,  except  I  drink  it,  thy  will  be  done. 

(43)  And  he  came  again  and  found  them  sleeping,  48 
for  their  eyes  were  heavy.    (44^  And  he  left  them,  44 
and  went  again  and  prayed  tne  third  time,  and 
usedo  the  same  language.     (45)  Then  he  came  to  45 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Sleep  on  now,  and 
take  rest.     Behold,  the  hour  is  come :  and  the  Son 

of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands  of  sinners. 
(46)  Arise,  let  us  go.  Behold,  he  that  betrayeth  46 
me  hath  come.  (47)  And  while  he  was  yet  speak-  47 
ing,  lo,  Judas  the  betrayer,  one  of  the  twelve, 
arrived;  and  a  great  multitude  with  him^  with 
swords  and  clubs,  from  the  presence  of  the  chief 
priests  and  elders  of  the  people.    (48)  And  Judas  48 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW,   XXVI. 


66 


the  betrayer  had  given  them  a  sign,  saying:  He  it 

19  is,  whom  I  shall  kiss:  him  seize  ye.    (49)  And 

forthwith  he  approached  Jesus,  and  said:  Hail,P 

50  Babbi ;  and  kissed  him.  (50)  And  Jesus  said  to 
him:  My  friend,  is  it  for  tms  thou  hast  come? 
Then  they  came  up,  and  laid  their  hands  on  Jesus, 

51  and  took  him.  (51)  And  lo,  one  of  them  with 
Jesus  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  drew  a  sword, 
and  smote  a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  oflF 

52  his  ear.  (52)  Then  Jesus  said  to  him :  Eeturn  Ihe 
sword  to  its  place ;  for  all  they  that  take  swords, 

53  shall  die  by  swords.  (58)  Supposest  thou  that  I 
cannot  ask  of  my  Father,  and  he  now  assign  me 

54  more  than  twelve  legions  of  angels?  (64)  But 
how  then  would  the  scriptures  be  fulfilled,  that 

55  thus  it  must  be?  (55)  At  that  time  Jesus  said  to 
the  multitude:  Have  ye  come  out,  as  against  a 
cut-throat,  with  swords  and  clubs,  to  taie  me? 
I  daily  sat  with  you,  and  taught  ip  the  temple,  and 

56  ye  did  not  apprehend  me.  (66)  And  this  occurred, 
that  the  writings  of  the  prophets  might  be  fulfilled. 
Then  the  disciples  all  forsook  him  and  fled. 

57  And  they  who  apprehended  Jesus  carried  him 
to  Caiaphas  th^  high  priest,  where  the  Scribes  and 

58  Elders  were  assemblea.  (58)  And  Simon  Cephas' 
followed  after  him  at  a  distance,  unto  the  high 
priest's  hall,  and  entered,  and  sat  with  the  servants 

59  within,  that  he  might  see  the  issue.  (59)  And  the 
chief  priests  and  the  Elders  and  the  whole  assem- 
bly sought  for  witnesses  against  Jesus,  that  they 

60  might  put  him  to  death ;  (60)  and  found  them  not 
And  many  false  witnesses  came ;  and  at  last,  two 

61  came  forward,  (61)  and  said :  This  man  said,  I  can 
destroy  the  temple  of  God,  and  in  three  days  re- 

62  build  it.  (62)  And  the  high  priest  rose  up  and 
said  to  him :  Bespondest  thou  nothing?    What  do 

63  these  testify  against  thee?  (63)  And  Jesus  was 
silent  And  the  high  priest  answered,  and  said  to 
him:  I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  Otxi,  that  thou 
tell  us  whether  thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of 

64  Ood.  (64)  Jesus  saith  to  him:  Thou  hast  said. 
And  I  say  to  jou.  That  hereafter  ye  will  see  the 
Son  of  man  sitting  on  the  right  hand  of  power,* 

65  and  coming  on  the  clouds  of  heaven.  (65)  Then 
Ihe  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  and  said :  Behold, 
he  hath  blasphemed  I     Why  therefore  should  we 


>•   Gr.  Peter, 


•   or,  might. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


56 


MATTHEW,   XXVII. 


*  or,  opinion. 
^  or,  obnoxious. 


"  Gr.  Poter. 


*  or,  immediate' 


•Sy. 
Gr.  fj/fifJLova. 


Sy.  place  of 
cfferingt. 


cSy. 


seek  for  witnesses?    Behold,  ye  have  now  heard 
his  blasphemy.     (66)  What  is  your  pleasure?*  66 
They  answered  and  said:  He  is  liable^  to  death. 
(67)  Then  they  spit  in  his  face,  and  buffeted  him;  67 
ana  others  smote  him,   (68)  and  said    to  him:  68 
Prophesy  to  us,  thou  Messiah,  who  is  it  smote 
thee? 

And  Cephas^  was  sitting  without  in  the  hall,  69 
and  a  certain  maid  approached  him,  and  said  to 
him:  Thou  also  wast  with  Jesus  the  Nazarean. 
(70)  But  he  denied  [it]  before  them  all,  and  said :  70 
I  know  not  what  thou  sayest.     (71)  And  as  he  71 
went  out  into  the  porch,  another  maid  saw  him, 
and  said  to  them :  This  man  was  also  there  with 
Jesus  the  Nazarean.    (72)  And  again  he  denied,  72 
with  oaths:  I  know  not  that  man.     (78)  And  a  73 
little  after,  those  standing  [there]  came  up  and  said 
to  Cephas :  Certainly,  thou  too  art  one  of  them ; 
and  thy  speech  ni;aketh  thee  manifest.     f74)  Then  74 
he  began  to  imprecate,  and  to  swear,  I  imow  not 
that  man.    And  in  that  hour'  the  cook  crew. 
(75)  And  Cephas  remembered  the  declaration  of  75 
Jesus,  who  said  to  him  :   Before  the  cock  croweth, 
thou  wilt  three  times  deny  me.     And  he  went  out, 
and  wept  bitterly. 

And  when  it  was  morning,  the  chief  priests  XXVII. 
and  the  elders  of  the  people  held  a  council  against 
Jesus,  how  they  might  put  him  to  death.     (2)  And    2 
they  bound   him,  and  carried  him  and   dehvered 
him  up  to  Pilate,  the  president.* 

Then  Judas  the  betrayer,  when  he  saw  that  Jesus     3 
was  condemned,  repented.     And  he  went  and  re- 
turned the  thirty  pieces  of  silver  to  the  chief  priests 
and  elders;    (4)    and  said:    I  have  sinned,   by    4 
betraying  innocent  blood.    And  they  said:  What 
is  that  to  us?    See  to  it  thyself    (5)  And  he  cast    5 
down  the  silver  in  the  temple,  and  retiring,  went 
and  strangled  himself     (6)  And  the  chief  priests    6 
took  up  the  silver,  and  said:   It  is  not  lawftd  to 

Eut  it  mto  the  treasury,^  because  it  is  the  price  of 
lood.     (7)  And  they  took  counsel,  and  bought    7 
with  it  the  potter's  field,  for  a  place  to  bury  stran- 
gers.    (8)  Wherefore  that  field  is  called  the  field    8 
of  blood,c  unto  this  day.     (9)  Then  was  fulfilled    9 
that  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet,  saying:  I 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW.   XXVIL 


67 


took  the  ttiirty  [shekels]  of  eHyet^  the  prioe  of  the 
precious  one,  which  they  of  the  children  of  Israel 

10  had  stipulated ;  (10)  and  I  gave  them  for  the  pot- 
ter's field,  as  the  Lord  directed  me. 

11  And  Jesus  stood  before  the  president  And  the 
president  asked  him,  and  said  to  him:  Art  thou 
the  king  of  the  Jews?    And  Jesus  said  to  him: 

12  Thou  hast  said.    (12^  And  when  the  chief  priests 

13  and  elders  accused  nim,  he  made  no  reply.  (18) 
Then  Pilate  said  to  him :  Hearest  thou  not  now 

14  much  they  testify  against  thee  ?  (14)  But  he  gave 
him  no  answer,  not  even  one  woni:  and  therefore 

15  Pilate  wondered  greatly.  (15)  And  at  each  festi- 
val, the  president  was  accustomed  to  release  to  the 

16  people  one  prisoner,  such  as  they  preferred.  (16) 
Ana  they  had  then  in  bonds  a  noted  prisoner, 

17  called  Bar  Abas.*^     (17)  And  when  they  were  *  Gr. 
assembled,  Pilate  said  to  tnem:  Whom  will  ye,  that    Bapa^^^. 
I  release  to  vou.  Bar  Abas,  or  Jesus  who  is  called 

18  Messiah  ?    (18)  For  Pilate  knew  that  it  was  from 

19  enmity  they  had  delivered  him  up.  (19)  And  as 
the  president  was  sittingon  his  tribunal,®  his  wife 
sent  to  him,  and  said :  Have  thou  nothing  to  do 
with  that  just  man ;  for  I  have  suffered  much  this 

20  day  in  a  dream  because  of  him.  (20)  But  the 
chief  priests  and  the  elders  persuaded  the  mul- 
titude, that  they  should  demand  Bar  Abas,  and 
destroy  Jesus.  (21)  And  the  president  answered, 
and  said  to  them :  Which  of  the  two,  will  ye,  that 
I  release  to  you  ?  And  they  said :  Bar  Abas.  (22) 
Pilate  said  to  them :  And  what  shall  I  do  to  Jesus 
who  is  called  Messiah?  They  all  replied:  Let 
him  be  crucified.  (23)  The  president^ said  to  them:  '  l  e.  Pilate. 
But  what  hath  he  done,  that  is  evil?  And  they 
cried  out  the  more,  and  said :  Let  him  be  crudfieo. 
(24)  And  Pilate,  when  he  saw  that  it  availed 
nothing,  but  rather  that  tumult  was  produced,  took 
water,  and  washed  his  hands  before  the  eyes  of  the 
multitude,  and  said:  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of 
this  just  man :  see  ye  to  ij^  (25^  And  all  the 
people  answered,  andf  said :  His  blood  be  on  us, 
and  on  our  children!  (26)  Then  released  he  to 
them  Bar  Abas ;  and  scourged  Jesus  with  whips,? 
and  delivered  him  to  be  crucified.  (27)  Then  the 
soldiers  of  the  president  took  Jesus  into  the  Pr»- 
toriuin,^  and  assembled  the  whole  regiment"  against 

Digitized  by 


21 
22 


28 


24 


25 
26 
27 


from  Greek. 


Sy. 

Sy.  |A£k£Dl, 
Gr.  tfwrpo. 

Google 


68 


MATTHEW,   XXVIL 


Sy.  :>q1^ 


Sy. 


ifiy  "jr^ffftV 


Gr.  Xjitfron, 


°  or,  saved, 
o  or,  save. 


him.  (28)  And  they  stripped  him,  and  put  on  28 
him  a  scarlet  military  cloak.  (29)  And  they  wove  29 
a  crown  of  thorns,  and  set  it  on  his  head,  and 

e)ut]  a  reed  in  his  hand,  and  they  bowed  their 
nees  before  him,  and  mocked  him,  and  said: 
Hail,k  thou  king  of  the  Jews.  (80)  And  they  spit  80 
in  his  face,  and  took  the  reed,  and  smote  lum  on 
his  head.  (81)  And  when  they  had  mocked  81 
him,  they  divested  him  of  the  cloak,  and  clothed 
him  in  his  own  garments,  and  led  him  out  to  be 
crucified. 

And  as  they  went  out,  they  found  a  man  of  82 
Cyrene  whose  name  was  Simon;  him  they  com- 
pelled to  bear  his  cross.     (33)  And  they  came  to  88 
a  place  which  is  called  Golgotha,*  which  is  inter- 
preted a  skull.    (84)  And  they  gave  him  to  drink  84 
vinegar  mixed  with  gall.     And  he  tasted  [it],  and 
would  not  drink.     (35)  And  when  they  had  cruci-  85 
fled  him,  they  distributed  his  garments  by  lot.*^ 

(36)  And  they  sat  down,  and  watched  him  there.  86 

(37)  And  they  placed  over  nis  head  the  cause  of  87 
his  death,  in  the  writing:   This  is  Jesus,  the 
KING  OF  THE  Jews.    (38)  And  there  were  cruci-  88 
fied  with  him  twojoij^jgi^  the  one  on  his  right 
hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left. — (89)  And  they  89 
that  pasfied  by  reviled  him,  and  shook  their  heads, 
(40)  and    said:    Destroyer  of  the    temple,   and  40 
builder  of  it  in  three  days,  deliver  thyself  if  thou 
art  the   Son   of  God,  and  come  down  from  the 
cross.    (41)  So  also  the  chief  priests  mocked,  with  41 
the  Scribes  and  Elders  and  Pharisees,   (42)  and  42 
said:  He  gave  life"  to  others,  his  own  life  he  can- 
not preserve. <>     If  he  is  the  king  of  Israel,  let  him 
now  descend  from  the  cross,  and  we  wiU  believe 

in  him.f  (43)  He  trusted  in  God ;  let  him  rescue  48 
him  now,  if  he  hath  pleasure  in  him :  for  he  said, 


*  In  the  editions  of  1815  and  1826  is  the  following  note: — 

'^  Aoeording  to  some  of  the  Greek  copies,  there  is  added,  thus:  that  so  might 
be  fulfilled  that  which  was  spoken  by  the  prophet  David:  They  distributed  my  gar- 
meiUs  among  themy  and  upon  my  vesture  they  cast  the  lot/* 

This  addition  is  not  found  in  four  of  the  most  ancient  editions  of  the  Syiiae 
New  Testament,  and  it  is  put  in  the  margin  of  the  more  modem  editions.  It  wai 
doubtless  a  modem  addition  to  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  borrowed  from  th« 
Greek.— ^  Translator, 


f  In  some  editions :  (hat  we  may  see,  and  believe  in  him. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MATTHEW.   XXVIL 


59 


44 


I  am  the  Son  of  God. 
maraudersp  alsoy  that 


(44)  In  like  manner 
maraudersp  also,  that  were  crucified  with  Tiim, 
4j>  reproacned  mm. — (45)  And  from  the  sixth  hour 
there  was  darkness  over  all  the  land,'  until  the 

46  ninth  hour.  (46)  And  about  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus 
cried  with  a  loud  voice  and  said :  0  God,  0  God; 

47  why  hast  thou  forsaken  me  ?*  (47)  And  some  of 
them  that  stood  there,  when  thev  heard  [it],  said: 

48  He  calleth  for  Elijah.*  (48)  And  immediately  one 
of  them  ran,  and  took  a  sponee,  and  filled  it  with 
vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a  reeo,  and  gave  him  to 

49  drink.     (49)  &ut  the  rest  said:   Desist;   we  will 

50  see  if  Elijah  will  come  to  rescue  him.  (50)  Then 
Jesus  cried  a^ain  with  a  loud  voice,  and  yielded  up 

51  his  spirit.* — (51)  And  instantly,  the  curtain  ^  of  the 
door  of  the  temple  was  torn  asunder,  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom ;  and  the  earth  shook ;  and  the 

52  rocks  rived;  (52)  and  graves  were  opened;  and 

53  many  bodies  of  saints  who  slept,  arose,  (58)  and 
came  forth ;  and,  after  his  resurrection,  entered  into 

54  the  holy  city,  and  appeared  to  many.  (54^  And 
the  centurion,  and  they  that  were  witn  him 
guarding  Jesus,  when  they  saw  the  earthquake 
and  the  things  that  occurred,  feared  greatly,  and 
said :  Verily,  this  was  the  Son  of  QtxL  (55)  And 
many  women  were  there,  looking  on  from  a 
distance ;  the  same  who  had  followed  Jesus  from 

56  QtJilee,  and  had  ministered  to  him.  (56)  One  of 
them  was  Mary  of  Magdala,  also  Mary  the  mother 
of  James  andJoses^nd  the  mother  of  Zebedee's 

57  children.  \  \^b/)*2Lndwhen  it  was  evening,  there 
came  a  rich  man  of  Bamath,^  whose  name  was 

58  Joseph,  who  was  also  a  disciide  of  Jesus.  (58) 
This  man  went  to  Pilate,  ana  begged  the  body 
of  Jesus.     And  Pilate  directed  the  body  to  be 

59  given  him.  (59)  And  Joseph  took  the  body,  and 
wrapped  it  in  a  winding-sheet  of  clean  linen; 
(60)  and  laid  it  in  his  new  sepulchre,'  that  was 
excavated  in  a  rock.  And  he  rolled  o  great  stone 
against  the  door  of  the  sepulchre,  and  departed : 
(61^  And  there  were  present  Mary  of  Mlagdala, 
ana  the  other  Mary^  who  sat  over  against  the 
grave.-^62)  Ancl"on  the  day  that  was  next  after 


55 


60 


61 


'  or,  eart^ 


llio. 


Sj.face. 


"  Sy.  ]diOi 


«  Sy. 


*  Sy.  ^^%Aor^^  lilo!^  ^1  ^1 ;    n,  Ik  lemdno  sMMIumet 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


60 


MATTHEW,   XXVIIL 


IM-"- 


Sy.  evening. 


^  Sy.  said. 


Sy.^ai^ 


the  preparation,  the  ohief  priests  and  Pharisees 
assembled  before  Pilate,   (6S)  and  said  to  him:  63 
Our  Lord,  we  remember  tnat  this  deceiver  said, 
while  he  was  alive,  Afber  three  davs,  I  shall  arise. 
(64)  Command,  therefore,  to  guard  the  sepulchre,  64 
until  the  third  day ;  lest  his  disciples  come  and 
steal  him  awa^r  by  night,  and  say  to  the  people, 
that  he  hath  risen  from  the  dead;   and  the  last 
delusion  be  worse  than  the  first    (65)  Pilate  said  65 
to  them:   Ye  have^soldiere:  go  and  guard  it,  as 
ye  know  how.     (86)Ana  they  went  and  set  a  66 
guard  to  the  sepulchre,  and  sealed  the  stone. 

And  in  the  close*  of  the  sabbath,  as  the  XXVIIL 
first   [day]   of  the  week   began  to  dawn,   came 
Mary  of  Magdala  and  the  other  Mary,  to  view 
the  sepulchre. — (2)   And  lo,   there  was  a  great    2 
earthquake :  for  an  angel  of  the  Lord  descended 
from  heaven,  and  came  and  rolled  away  the  stone 
from  the  door,  and  sat  upon  it.     (3)   And  his    3 
aspect  was  like  the  lightmng;   and  his  raiment 
white    like    snow:     (4)    and  from  fear  of  him    4 
the  keepers  were  astounded,  and  became  as  dead 
men. — (6)  And  the  angel  answered,  and  said  to    5 
the  women:   Be  not  ye  afraid,  for  I  know  that 
ye  seek  Jesus  who  was  crucified.    (6)  He  is  not    6 
here;   for  he  is  risen,  as  he  predicted.**     Come 
ye,  see  the  place  where  our  hovd  was  laid.    (7)    7 
And  [then]  go  quickly,  tell  his  disciples,  that  he 
is  risen  from  the  dead ;  and  lo,  he  precedeth  you 
to  Galilee ;  there  will  ye  see  him.    Behold,  I  have 
told  you.— (8)  And  mey  went  quickly  from  the    8 
sepulchre,  with  fear  and  great  joy,  and  ran  to'  teU 
his  disciples.    (9)   And  lo,  Jesus  met  them,  and    9 
said  to  them:   Hail,®  ye.    And  they  came  and 
clasped  his  feet,  and  worshipped  him.    (10)  Then  10 
Jesus  said  to  them :   Be  not  afraid ;   but  go,  tell 
my  brethren,  that  they  go  into  Galilee,  and  there 
they  will  see  me. 

And  while  they  were  going,  some  of  the  guards  11 
came  into  the  city,  and  told  the  chief  priests  all 
that  had  occurred.    (12)  And  they  assembled  with*  12 
the  Elders,  and  held  a  council ;   and  they  gave 
no  little  money  to  the  guards,   (13)  and  said  to  18 
them:   Say  ye,  that  his  disciples  came  and  stole 
him  away  by  night,  while  we  were  asleep.    (14)  14 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   L 

And  if  this  should  be  reported  before  the  Presi' 
dent,  we  will  paxjify  him,  and  cause  you  not  to 

15  be  troubled.  (l5)  And  the^,  having  received  the 
monev,  did  as  they  were  instructed.  And  this 
story «  is  current  among  the  Jews  to  this  day. 

16  And  the  eleven  disciples  went  into  Oalilee,  to 
the  mountain  which  Jesus  had  appointed  for  them. 

17  (17)  And  when  they  beheld  him,  they  worshipped 

18  him:  but  some  doubted.  (18)  And  Jesus  came 
near,  and  discoursed  with  them,  and  said  to  them : 
All  authority  is  given  to  me,  in  heaven  and  on 
earth.     And  as  my  Father  sent  me,  so  also  1  send 

19  jrou.  (19)  Go  ye,  therefore,  and  instruct*  all  na- 
tions ;  and  baptize  them  in  the  name  of  the  Father, 

20  and  of  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (20)  And 
teach*"  them  to  observe  all  that  I  have  commanded 
you.  And,  behold,  I  am  with  you  always,?  unto 
the  consummation  of  the  world.**    Amen. 


Completion  of  the  Holy  Gospel^  as  published  by  Matthew ; 
and  whtch  he  published  in  Hebrew  f  in  the  land  of  the  Pales- 
tineans. 


61 


uiyinfi. 


•Sy.  O^lO^ 

Sy.  o^l!;^ 

Sy.  all  days, 

*Sy. 

"  Sy.  A^)|£Li 


The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Annimeiation  of  Mark  the  EvangelisL 


L      The  beginning  of  the   gospel*  of  Jesus  the 

2  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God. — (2)  As  it  is  written  in 

Isaiah  the  prophet :    Behold,  I  send  my  messenger 

8  before  thy  face,  who  shall  prepare  thy  way.    (8) 

The    voice    of  one    crying    in    the  wilderness: 

Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  make  smooth 

4  his  paths.  (4)  John  baptized  in  the  wilderness, 
and  proclaimed  the  baptism^  of  repentance  for  the 

5  remission  of  sins.  (5)  And  there  went  out  to  him 
all  the  region^  of  Judaea,  and  all  the  people*^  of 
Jerusalem;   and  he  baptized  them  in  the  river 

6  Jordaji,  while  they  confessed  their  gin&    (6)  And 


Sy. 


»•  Sy. 

•  s>.  Joo, 

Gr.  X^P^ 

*  Sy.  ehUdfem, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


62 


■  Sy.  ]2|^ifiD 


«Sy.  0,^51 


^  or,  teaching. 


MARK,   L 

this  Jolm  was  clad  in  raiment  of  camel's  hair; 
and  was  girded  with  a  cincture  of  skin  about  his 
loins;  and  his  food  was  locusts  and  wild  honey. 
(7)  And  he  proclaimed,  and  said:  Behold,  after  7 
me  Cometh  one  more  powerful  than  I,  of  whom  I 
am  not  worthy  to  stoop  and  untie  the  fastenings  of 
his  shoes.  (8)  I  have  baptized  you  with  water ;  8 
but  he  will  baptize  you  with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

And  it  occurred,  in  those  days,  that  Jesus  came    9 
from  Nazareth  in  Galilee,  and  was  baptized  in 
Jordan  by  John.    (10)  And  immediately  on  his  10 
coming  from  the  water,  he  saw  the  heavens  cleft, 
and  the  Spirit  descending  like  a  dove  upon  him. 

(11)  And  there  was  a  voice  from  the  heavens:  11 
Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  delight. — 

(12)  And  directly  the  Spirit  carried  him  into  the  12 
wilderness:  (13)  and  he  was  there  in  the  wilder-  13 
ness  forty  days,  being  tempted  by  Satan.e     And 

he  was  with  the  wild  beasts ;   and  angels  minis- 
tered to  him. 

After  John  was  delivered  up,  Jesus  came  into  14 
Galilee,  and  proclaimed  the  timngs^  of  the  king- 
dom of  God,   (15)   and  said:  The  time  is  com-  15 
pleted,  and  the  kingdom  of  God  is  near.     Repent 
ye,   and  believe  the  tidings. — (16)    And  as   he  16 
walked  near  the  sea  of  GalUee,  he  saw  Simon  and 
Andrew  his  brother  casting  a  net  into  the  sea, 
for  they  were  fishermen.     (17)   And  Jesus  said  to  17 
them :  Come  after  me,  and  I  will  make  you  fishers 
of  men,    (18)  And  immediately   they  left  their  18 
nets,  and  went  aflier  him.     (19)  And  as  he  passed  19 
on  a  little,  he  saw  James  the  son  of  Zebedee,?  and 
John  his  brother,  who  also  were  in  a  ship,  and 
mending  their  nets.     (20)   And  he  called  them:  20 
and  immediately  they  left  Zebedee  their  father  in 
the  ship,  with  the  hired  servants,  and  went  after 
him. 

And  when  they  entered   Capernaum,  >»  he  im-  21 
mediately  taught  on  the  sabbath  in  their  syna- 
gogues.    (22)    And  thev  were  astonished  at  his  22 
doctrine ;»  for  he  taught  them,  as  having  authority, 
and    not  as    their  Scribes.— (23)    And  in  their  28 
synagogue  was  a  man,  in  whom  was  an  unclean 
spirit;   and  he  cried  out,   (24)  and  said:   What  24 
have  we  to  do  with  thee  ?  Jesus  thou  Nazarean. 
Hast  thou  come  to  destroy  us  ?    I  know  thee,  who 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   L 

25  thou  art,  the  Holy  One  of  God,  (25)  -And  Jesus 
rebuked  him,  and  said:   Shut  thy  mouth,  and 

26  come  out  of  him.  (26)  And  the  unclean  spirit 
threw  him  down,  and  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and 

27  came  out  of  him.  (27)  And  they  were  all  amazed, 
and  inqiured  one  of  another,  and  said :  What  is 
this?  What  new  doctrine  is  this?  For  with 
authority  he  commandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and 

28  they  obey  him.     (28)  And  immediately  his  fame 

29  spread^  into  all  the  land  of  Galilee. — (29)  And  he 
retired  from  the  synagogue,  and  enterea  into  the 
house  of  Simon  and  Andrew,  with  James  and 

30  John.  (30)  And  Simon's  mother-in-law  was  lying 
sick  with  a  fever:  and  they  told  him  about  her. 

31  (81)  And  he  came,  and  took  her  hand,  and 
raised  her  up ;  and  immediately  the  fever  left  her, 

32  and  she  ministered  to  them. — (82)  And  in  the 
evening,  at  the  setting  of  the  sun,  they  brought  to 
him  all  them  that  were  diseased,  and  demoniacs. 

33  r83^  And  all  the  city  was  collected  at  the  door. 

34  (34)  And  he  healed  many  who  labored  under 
divers  diseases,  and  cast  out  many  demons  ;*  and 
he  suffered  not  the  demons  to  speak,  because  they 
knew  him. 

36  And  in  the  morning,  he  rose  much  before  others, 
and  retired  to  a  solitary  place,  and  there  prayed. 

36  (86)  And  Simon  and  his  associates"*  sought  for 

37  him.    (37)  And  when  they  found  him,  they  said 

88  to  him:  Every  body^  is  seeking  for  thee.  (88) 
And  he  said  to  them:  Go  into  the  adjacent 
villages  and  towns;  for  there  also  I  will  preach, 

89  because  therefore  have  I  come.  (39)  And  he 
preached  in  all  their  synagogues,  in  all  Galilee, 
and  cast  out  demons. 

40  And  a  leper  came  to  him,  and  fell  at  his  feet, 
and  entreated  him,  and  said  to  him :  If  thou  wilt, 

41  thou  canst  make  me  clean.  (41)  And  Jesus  had 
compassion'  on  him,  and  stretched  out  his  hand, 
and  touched  him,  and  said :  I  will ;  be  thou  clean. 

42  (42)  And  in  that  hour,  his  leprosy  departed  from 

43  him,  and  he  became  clean.     (43)  And  he  charged 

44  him,  and  sent  him  away,  (44)  and  he  said  to  him 
See  that  thou  tell  no  person;  but  go,  show  thyself 
to  the  priests,  and  oner  an  oblation  on  account  of 
thy  purification,  as  Moses  commanded,  for  a  testi- 

46  mony  to  them.    (45)  And  he,  as  he  went  out. 


08 


^  Sy.  went 


Sy.  lolij 


"  or,  Qu)$e  with 

him, 
°  or,  every  one. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


M 


MARK,   XL 


•Sy.]AijiLD 


^Sj.ipake. 


c  Sy.  these 
(kings. 


>  Sy.  ^Ae  eyes. 


•  Sy.  |JD  acA 


began  to  prodaim  [it]  much,  and  to  divulge  the 
matter  ;o  so  that  Jesus  could  not  openly  go  into 
the  city,  but  was  without,  in  desert  places;  and 
they  came  to  him  from  every  quarter. 

And  Jesus  again  entered  into  Capernaum,  after  IL 
some  days.    And  when  they  heard  that  he  was  in 
the  house,  (2)  many  were  assembled,  so  that  [the    2 
house]  could  not  contain  them,  not  even  b^ore 
the  door.    And  he  held^   discourse  with  them. 
(8)  And  they  came  to  him,  and  brought  to  him  a    8 
paralytic,  borne  between  four  persons.     (4)  And    4 
as  they  could  not  come  near  him  on  account  of  the 
crowd,  they  ascended  to  the  roo^  and  removed  the 
covering  of  the  place  where  Jesus  was,  and  let 
down  the  bed  on  which  the  paralytic  lay.    (5)  And    6 
when  Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  to  the  paralytic: 
My  son,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.    (6)  And  there    6 
were  some  Scribes  and  Pharisees  there,  who  sat  and 
reasoned  in  their  hearts :  (7)  Who  is  this  speaking    7 
blasphemy?     Who  can  forgive  sins,  except  God 
only  ?    (8)  And  Jesus  knew,  in  his  spirit,**  that  they    8 
thus  reasoned  in  themselves ;  and  he  said  to  them: 
Why  reason  ye  thus*^  in  your  heart?     (9)  Which    9 
is  the  easier,  to  say  to  a  paralytic,  Thy  sins  are  for- 
given thee  ?  or  to  say.  Arise,  take  up  thy  bed,  and 
walk?    (10\  But  that  ye  may  know  that  the  Son  10 
of  man  hatn  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins, — ^he 
said  to  the  paralytic,  (11)  I  say.  to  thee,  Arise,  take  11 
thy  bed,  and  go  to  thy  house.    (12)  And  he  arose  12 
in  that  hour,  took  up  his  bed,  and  departed  in 
presence*^  of  them  all :  so  that  they  were  all  amazed, 
and  praised  God,  saying :  We  never  saw  the  like. 

And  he  went  again  to  the  sea ;  and  all  the  multi-  13 
tude  came  to  him,  and  he  taught  them.    (14)  And  14 
as  he  passed  along  he  saw  Levi  the  son  of  Alphe- 
us®  sitting  among  the  publicans.     And  he  said  to 
him:   Come  after  me.    And  he  arose  and  went 
after  him. — (16)  And  it  was  so,  that  as  he  reclined  15 
in  his  [Levi  s]  house,  manv  publicans  and  sinners 
reclined  with  Jesus  and  with  his  disciples :  for  they 
were  many,  and  they  followed   him.    (16J  And  16 
when  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  saw  that  ne  ate 
with  publicans  and  with  sinners,  they  said  to  his 
disciples:  Why  doth  he  eat  and  drink  with  pub- 
licans and  sinners?     (17)  When  Jesus  heard  [it],.  17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK.    III. 


86 


he  said  to  them :  The  healthy  need  not  a  physician, 
but  those  laboring  under  disease :  I  came,  not  to 

18  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners.— (18)  And  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  were  festers; 
and  they  came  and  said  to  him :  Why  are  the  dis- 
ciples of  John  and  of  the  Pharisees  fasters,  and  thy 

19  disciples  fast  not  ?  (19)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Can  the 
guests**  of  the  nuptial  chamber  fest  so  lone  as  the  '  Sy.  children. 

20  bridegroom  is  witn  them  ?  No.  (20)  But  me  days 
will  come,  when  the  bridegroom  wt31  be  taken  from 

21  them,  and  then  they  will  fest,  in  that  day.  (21)  No 
one  taketh  a  patch  of  new  cloth  and  seweth  it  upon 
an  old  garment,  lest  the  supplemental  new  should 
take  from  the  old,  and  the  rent  become  the  greater. 

22  (22)  And  no  one  putteth  new  wine  into  old  sacks, 
lest  the  wine  burst  the  sacks,  and  the  sacks  be 
spoiled,  and  the  wine  spilled;  but  they  put  new 

23  wine  into  new  sacks. — (28)  And  it  was  so,  that  as 
Jesus  on  a  sabbath  walked  in  the  tillage  grounds. 

24  his  disciples  walked  and  plucked  the  ears.  ^4)  And 
the  Pharisees  said  to  him:  See,  how  on  the  saobath, 

25  they  do  that  which  is  not  lawful?  (25)  Jesus  said 
to  them:  Have  ye  never  read  wmit  David  did, 
when  he  had  need  and  was  hungry,  he  and  his  at- 

26  tendants  ?s  ^26)  How  he  entered  flie  house  of  Go(L 
when  Abiathar  was  high  priest,  and  ate  the  bread 
of  the  Lord's  table,  which  it  was  not  lawful  for  anv 
but  priests  to  eat,  and  gave  [it]  also  to  those  with 

27  him?  (27)  And  he  said  to  them:  The  sabbath 
was  made  on  man's  account,  and  not  man  for  the 

28  sake  of  the  sabbath.  (28)  Therefore  also  the  Son 
of  man  is  lord  of  the  sabbath. 


HL    And  again  Jesus  entered  into  a  synagogue.    And 
there  was  a  man  there,  whose  hand  was  withered. 

2  (2)  And  they  watched  him,  that  if  he  should  heal 

3  on  the  sabbath,  they  might  accuse  him.  (3)  And 
he  said  to  the  man  of  the  withered  hand :  Stand  up 

4  in  the  midst  (4)  And  he  said  also  to  them :  Is  it 
lawful  to  do  good  on  the  sabbath,  or  to  do  evil? 
to  give  life  to  a  person, »  or  to  destroy?    But  they 

5  were  alent.  (5)  And  he  looked  on  them  with  in- 
dignation, being  grieved  with  the  hardness  of  their 
heart  And  he  said  to  the  man:  Stretch  forth  thy 
hand.    And  he  stretched  forth,  and  his  hand  was 

6  restored.    (6)  And  the  Pharisees  went  out>  that 


Digitized  by 


K  Sy.  those  with 
him. 


Google 


66 


*»  Sy.  rebuked. 


«  Gr.  Peter. 
dSy. 

•  Sy.        i^ 

,iSnSoZ 

'  Sy.  ,ig^\M 

»  Sy.  a>Z 

^  Sy. 
»*OTO  1  I  » >  I 

iSy. 
OUOOI  ^ 

k  or,  parables. 


MARK,   IIL 

very  hour,  with  the  domestics  of  Herod,  and  held 
a  consultation  against  him,  how  they  might  destroy 
him« 

And  Jesus  retired  with  his  disciples  to  the  sea.     7 
And  many  people  joined  him  from  Galilee,  and 
from  Judaea^  (8)  and  from  Jerusalem,  and  from    8 
Idumaea,  and  from  beyond  Jordan,  and  from  Tyre, 
and  from  Sidon: — great  multitudes,  when  they 
heard  all  that  he  did,  came  to  him.    (9)  And  he    9 
told  his  disciples  to  bring  him  a  ship,  on  account 
of  the  multitude,  lest  they  should  crowd  upon  him. 
(10)  For  he  had  healed  many,  so  that  they  rushed  10 
upon  him,  in  order  to  touch  him.    (11)  And  they  11 
who  were  afflicted  with  unclean  spirits,  when  they 
saw  him,  fell  down  and  cried  out,  and  said:  Thou 
art  the  Son  of  God.    (12)  And  he  charged**  them  12 
much,  not  to  make  him  known. 

And  he  ascended  a  mountain,  and  called  whom  13 
he  pleased ;  and  they  came  to  him.    (14)  And  he  14 
chose  twelve  to  be  with  him,  whom  he  would  send 
out  to  preach,  (15)  and  who  would  have  power  to  15 
heal  the  sick,  and  to  cast  out  demons.    (16)  And  to  16 
Simon  he  gave  the  name  of  Cephas.®    (17)  And  to  17 
James  the  son  of  Zebedee  and  to  John  the  brother 
of  James,  he  gave  the  name  of  Boanerges,  ^  that  is. 
Sons  of  thunder.     (18)  And  pie  chose  also]  An-  18 
drew,  and  Philip,  and  Bartholomew,  e  and  Matthew, 
and  Thomas,  and  James  the  son  of  Alpheus,^  and 
Thaddeus,ir  and  Simon  the  Canaanite,  (19)  And  19 
Judas  Iscariot,  who  betraved  him. 

And  they  came  to  the  house:  (20)  and  the  mul-  20 
titude  assembled  again,  so  that  they  could  not  eat 
bread.    (21)  And  his  kinsmeni»  heard,  and  went  21 
out  to  take  him ;  for  they  said :  He  is  out  of  his 
reason."     (22)  And  those  Scribes  that  had  come  22 
down  from  Jerusalem,  said :  Beelzebub  is  in  him ; 
and, by  the  prince  of  demons  he  expelleth  demons. 
(28)  And  Jesus  called  them,  and  said  to  them,  by  23 
similitudes  :^    How  can   Satan  cast  out  Satan  ?  ' 
(24)  For  if  a  kingdom  be  divided  against  itself,  24 
that  kingdom  cannot  stand.     (25)  And  if  a  house  25 
be  divided  against  itself,  that  house  caimbt  stand. 
(26)  And  if  Satan  rise  up  against  himself  and  be  26 
divided,  he  cannot  stand,  but  is  at  an  end.    (27)  No  27 
one  can  enter  the  house  of  a  strong  man,  and  plun- 
iler  his  goods,  unless  he  first  bind  the  strong  man ; ' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


82 


34 


MARK,   IV. 

28  and  then  he  may  rob  his  house.  (28)  Verily  I  say 
to  you:  All  sins,  and  the  blasphemies  that  men 

29  may  utter, i  may  be  forgiven  them:  (29)  but  who- 
ever shall  blaspheme  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  to 
him  for  ever™  taere  is  no  forgiveness ;  but  he  is  ob- 

30  noxious'i  to  eternal^  judgment     (30)  Because  they 

31  had  said :  An  unclean  spirit  is  in  him. — (31)  And 
his  mother  and  his  brothers?  came,  and,  standing 
without,  sent  to  call  him  to  them.  (32)  And  the 
multitude  were  sitting  around  him,  and  thej  said 
to  him :  Lo,  thy  mother  and  thy  brothers,  without^ 

33  call  for  thee.  (33)  He  replied,  and  said  to  them : 
Who  is  mv  mother?  and  who  are  my  brothers? 
(34)  And  he  looked  upon  those  who  sat  by  him, 
ana  said:   Behold  my  mother  I  and,  behold  my 

35  brothers  1  (35)  For  whoever  shall  do  the  pleasure 
of  God,  he  is  my  brother,  and  my  sister,  and  my 
mother. 

nr.  And  again  he  began  to  teach  by  the  side  of  the 
sea.  And  great  multitudes  were  assembled  about 
him ;  so  that  he  embarked  and  sat  in  a  ship  on  the 
sea,  and  all  the  multitude  stood  on  the  land  by  the 

2  side  of  the  sea.     (2)  And  he  taught  them  much 
by  similitudes.*     And  in  his  teaching,  he  said: 

3  (S)  Hear  ye :  Behold  a  sower  went  forth  to  sow. 

4  (4)  And  as  he  sowe3^  some  [seed]  fell  on  the  side 
of  the  path ;   and  a  bird  came,  and  devoured  it 

5  (5)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  a  rock,  so  that  it  had  not 
much  earth ;  and  it  soon  shot  up,  because  it  had 

6  no  depth  of  earth.     (6)  But  when  the  sun  was  up, 
it  wilted ;  and  because  it  had  no  root^  it  dried  up. 

7  (7)  And  other  [seed]  fell  among  thorns.    And  the 
thorns  grew  up,  and  choked  it,  and  it  yielded  no 

8  fruits.     (8)  And  other  [seed]  fell  on  good  ground, 
and  came  up,  and  grew,  and  yielded  fruits ;  some 

9  thirtjr,  some  sixty,  and  some  a  hundred.    (9)  And 
he  said :  Whoever  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

10  —7(10)  And  when  they  were  by  themselves,  those 
with  nina,  together  with  the  twelve,  asked  him 

11  [concerning]  this  similitude.^  (11)  And  Jesus 
said  to  them:  To  you  it  is  given  to  know  the 
mystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God;   but  to  them 

12  without,  all  is  in  similitudes :  (12^  that  when  they 
see,  they  may  see  and  not  see,  ana  when  they  hear, 
tney  may  hear  and  not  understand;   lest  they 


67 


*  Sy.  hUupheme 

-Sy.soNvN 

n  Sy.  debtor, 

•  Sy.  :>aS\l 


or,  parables 


*»  or,  parable. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


68 


MARK,   IV. 


«  Sy.  doth  come. 


Bj.foL 


'  or,  parabU. 


should  be  converted,  and  their  sins  be  forgiven 
them.     (13)  And  he  said  to  them:   Do  ye  not  IS 
understand  this  similitude?     And  how  will  ye 
understand  all  similitudes?    (14)  The  sower  that  14 
sowed,  sowed  the  word.    (15)  And  those  by  the  15 
side  of  the  path,  are  they  in  whom  the  word  is 
sown ;  and  as  soon  as  they  have  heard  [it],  Satan 
oometh,  and  taketh  away  the  word  that  was  sown 
in  their  hearts.    (16)  And  those  sown  on  the  rock,  16 
are  they  who,  when  they  hear  the  word,  immedi- 
ately with  joy  receive  it.    (17)  And  they  have  no  17 
root  in  them,  but  are  temporary ;  and  when  there 
is  affliction  or  persecution  on  account  of  the  word, 
they  are  quickly  stumbled.     (18)  And  those  sown  18 
among  thorns,  are  they  that  hear  the  word,  (19)  19 
and  the  cares  of  this  world,  and  the  deceitfulness 
of  riches,  and  the  residue  of  other  lusts  enter  in, 
and  choke  the  word,  and  it  is  without  fruits.    (20)  20    ' 
And  those  sown  on  good  ground  are  they  that 
hear  the  word,  and  receive  it,  and  bear  fruits,  by 
thirties,  and  by  sixties,  and  by  hundreds. — (21)  21 
And  he  said  to  them :  Is  a  lamp  brought^  to  be 
placed  under  a  bushel,  or  under  a  bed?    Is  it  not 
to  be  placed  on  a  light-stand?    (22)  For  there  is  22 
nothing  hid,  which  will  not  be  exposed;    and 
nothing  concealed,  which  will  not  be  made  mani- 
fest   ^3)  If  any  one  have  ears  to  hear,  let  him  28 
hear.— (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Take  heed  what  24 
ye  hear :  with  what  measure  ye  measure,  it  shall 
be  measured  to  you :  and  there  shall  more  be  given 
to  you  who  hear.    (25)  For  to  him  that  hatii,  will  25 
more  be  given ;  and  from  him  that  hath  not,  even 
what  he  hath,  will  be  taken  from  him. — (26)  And  26 
he  said :  So  is  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  if  a  man 
should  cast  seed  into  the  ground,  (27)  and  should  27 
sleep  and  rise,  by  night  and  by  day,  and  the  seed 
should  grow  ana  shoot  up,  he  knoweth  not  how. 
(28)  For  the  earth  bringeth  forth  the  fruit;  first  28 
the  plant,  and  subsequently  the  ear,  and  at  last  the 
complete  wheat  in  the  ear.     (29)  And  when  the  29 
fioiit  is  ripe,<i  immediately  cometh  the  sickle,  be- 
cause the  harvest  hath  arrived. — (30)  And  he  said:  80 
To  what  shall  we  liken  the  kingdom  of  God?  and 
with  what  similitudee  shall  we  compare  it?    (81)  81 
It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed  which,  when  it 
is  sown  in  the  earth,  is  ^he  least  of  all  seeds  sown 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   V. 

82  on  the  earth ;  (32)  and  when  it  is  sown  it  spring- 
eth  up,  and  becometh  greater  than  all  herbs,  and 
produceth  great  branches,  so  that  birds  can  lodge 

83  nnder  its  shadow. — (88)  And  by  many  such 
similitudes, — similitudes  such  as  they  could  hear, 

34  — JesusT  discoursed  with  the  people.  (84)  And 
without  similitudes  he  did  not  converse  with  them: 
but  to  his  disciples,  between  himself  and  them,  he 
explained  every  thing. 

35  And  he  said  to  them,  the  same  day  at  evening: 

36  Let  us  pass  over  to  the  other  side.  (86)  And  they 
sent  away  the  multitudes:  and  they  conducted 
him  in  the  ship  as  he  was.    And  there  were  also 

37  with  him  other  little  ships.  (87)  And  there  was  a 
great  tempest  and  wind :  and  the  waves  beat  upon 

88  the  ship,  and  it  was  near  being  filled.  (88)  And 
Jesus  was  asleep  on  a  pillow  in  the  hinder  part  of 
the  ship.  Ana  they  came  and  awoke  him,  and 
said  to  him :  Our  ICabbi,  carest  thou  not,  that  we 

39  perish?  (89)  And  he  arose,  and  rebuked  the 
wind,  and  said  to  the  sea:  Cease;  be  still.    And 

40  the  wind  ceased,  and  there  was  a  great  calm.  (40^ 
And  he  said  to  them :  Why  were  ye  so  fearftd  r 

41  and  why  have  ye  not  faith?  (41)  And  they 
feared  with  great  fear:  and  they  said,  one  to 
another:  Who  is  this,  that  even  the  winds  and 
the  sea  obey  him  I 


tb 


V, 
2 


And  he  came  to  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  to  the 
country  of  the  Gadarenes.»  (2)  And  as  he  went  out 
of  the  ship,  there  met  him  from  the  place  of  sepul 
chres  a  man  in  whom  was  an  unclean  spirit  *>  (8) 
And  he  dwelt  in  the  place  of  sepulchres ;  and  no 
one  could  confine  him  with  chains:  (4^  because, 
as  often  as  he  had  been  confined  with  fetters  and 
he  had  broken  the  chains  and  burst  the 


fetters :  and  no  one  could  subdue  him.  (5)  And 
continually,  by  night  and  by  day,  he  was  in  the 
place  of  sepulchres,  and  cried  and  wounded  himself 

6  with  stones.    (6)  And  when  he  saw  Jesus  at  a 

7  distance,  he  ran  and  worshipped  him;  (7)  and 
cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  What  have  I  to 
do  with  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Son  of  the  High  God  ? 
I  adjure  thee  by  God,  that  thou  torment  me  not 

8  (8)  For  he  had  said  to  him :  Come  out  of  the  naan, 

9  thou  unclean  spirit   (9)  And  he  demanded  of  him: 


Digitized  by 


Sy. 


Google 


70 

"  or,  the  land. 
«  Sy.  VjV 

'Sy. 


8  Sy.  he  of  the 
demons. 


^  Sy.  the  ten 
cities, 

»  Sy. 

lAjiCLLD 
"  Sy.  ^51q-i 


^   or,  multitude. 


MARK,   V. 

What  is  thj  name?    And  lie  replied  to  him :  Our 
name  is  Le^on ;«  for  we  are  many.    (10)  And  he  10 
besouffht  him  much,  that  he  woold  not  send  him 
out  of  the  country.^    (11)  And  there  was  there  11 
by  the  mountain,  a  great  herd  of  swine  grazing. 

(12)  And  the  demons®  oesought  him,  and  said:  Send  12 
us  upon  those  swine,  that  we  may  enter  them. 

(13)  And  he  permitted  them.    And  those  unclean  13 
spirits^  went  out,  and  entered  the  swine :  and  the 
herd,  of  about  two  thousand,  ran  to  a  precipice, 
and  fell  into  the  sea,  and  were  strangled  in  the 
waters.   (14)  And  they  who  tended  them,  fled  and  14 
told  [it]  in  the  city  and  in  the  villages :  and  they 
came  out  to  see  what  had  occurred.    (15)  And  15 
they  came  to  Jesus,  and  saw  him  in  whom  the 
demons  had  been, — ^him  in  whom  had  been  the 
legioD, — clothed,  and  sober,  and  sitting;  and  they 
were  afraid.     (16)  And  those  who  had  seen  [it]  16 
told  them  how  it  occurred  to  him  who  had  the 
demons,  and  also  concerning  the  swine.    (17)  And  17 
they  began  to  request  him,  that  he  would  go  from 
their  border.     (18)  And  as  he  ascended  the  ship,  18 
the  late  demoniac?  requested  that  he  might  con- 
tinue with  him.    (19)  And  he  suffered  him  not>  19 
but  said  to  him :  Go  home  to  thy  people,  and  tell 
them  what  the  Lord  hath  done  for  thee,  and  hath 
compassionated  thee.     (20)   And  he  went>   and  20 
began  to  publish  in  Decapolis,^  what  Jesus  had 
done  for  him.    And  they  were  all  amazed. 

And  when  Jesus  had  passed  by  ship  to  the  21 
other    side,    great    multitudes    again    assembled 
about  him  as  he  was  on  the  shore  of  the  sea. 
(22)  And  one  of  the  rulers*  of  the  synagogue,  22 
whose  name  was  Jairus,^  came,  and,  on  seeing  him, 
fell  at  his  feet,  (23)  and  besought  him  much,  and  23 
said  to  him :  My  daughter  is  very  sick ;  but  come 
and  lay  thy  hand  on  her,  and  she  will  be  cured, 
and  will  hve.     (24)  And  Jesus  went  with  him;  24 
and  a  great  company^  attended  him,  and  pressed 
upon  mm. — (25)  And  a  woman  who  had  had  a  25 
defluxion  of  blood  twelve  years,  (26)  and  who  had  26 
suffered  much  from  many  physicians,  and  had  ex- 
pended all  she  possessed,  and  was  not  profited,  but 
was  even  the  more  afflicted;  (27)  when  she  heard  27 
of  Jesus,  came  behind  him  in  the  press  of  the 
crowd,  and  touched  his  garment.     (28)   For  she  28 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30 


31 


S2 
33 


•  Sy.]jja^Sc 


MARK,   VL 

said :  If  I  but  touch  his  garment,  I  shall  live. 
f29)  And  immediately  the  fountain  of  her  blood 
oried  up ;  and  she  felt  in  her  body  that  she  was 
healed  of  her  plague.  (30)  And  Jesus  at  once 
knew  in  himself,  that  virtue  had  issued  from  him : 
and  he  turned  to  the  throng,  and  said:  Who 
touched  my  clothes?  (31)  And  his  disciples  said 
to  him :  Thou  seest  the  thrcHigs  that  press  upon 
thee ;  and  say  est  thou,  Who  touched  me  ?  fe2) 
And  he  looked  around,  to  see  who  had  done  tnis. 
(33)  And  the  woman,  fearing  and  trembling,  for 
she  knew  what  had  taken  place  in  her,  came  and 
fell  down  before  him,  and  told  him  all  the  truth. 
S4  (34)  And  he  said  to  her :  My  daughter,  thy  faith 
hath  made  thee  live :  go  in  peace ;  and  be  thou 

85  healed  of  thy  plague.— (35)  And  while  he  was 
speaking,  some  domestics  of  the  ruler  of  the 
synagogue  came,  and  said:  Thy  daughter  is 
dead :  why  therefore  troublest  thou  the  teacher  ?™ 

86  (36)  But  «Jesus  heard  the  word  they  spoke,  and  said 
to  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue:   Fear  not;   only 

87  believe.  (37)  And  he  sidfered  no  one  to  go  with 
him,  except  Simon  Cephas,  >^  and  James,  and  John  •  Gr.  FtUr. 

88  the  brother  of  James.  (88)  And  they  came  to  the 
house  of  the  ruler  of  the  synagogue ;  and  he  saw, 
that  they  were  in  a  tumult,  and  weeping,  and 

39  howling.  (39)  And  he  entered  in  and  said  to 
them:  Why  are  ye  in  a  tumult,  and  weep?    The 

40  maid  is  not  dead,  but  is  asleep.  (40)  And  they 
laughed  at  him.  But  Jesus  put  them  all  out 
And  he  took  the  maid's  &ther,  and  her  mother, 
and  those  that  accompanied  him,  and  entered  into 

41  where  the  maid  lay.    (41)  And  he  took  the  maid's 

42  hand,  and  said  to  her :  Maiden,  arise.®  (42)  And 
immediately  the  maid  arose,  and  walked ;  for  she 
was  twelve  years  old.    And  they  were  astonished 

43  with  a  great  astonishment  (43)  And  he  enjoined 
it  upon  them  much,  that  no  one  should  know  of  it 
And  he  directed,  that  they  should  give  her  to 
eat 


VX    And  Jesus  departed  from  there  and  came  to  his 

2  own  city,  and  his  disciples  attended  him.    (2)  And 

when  the  sabbath  came,  he  be^n  to  teach  in 

the  synagogue.      And  many  who  heard  Hiim] 

were    astonished,    and    said:    Whence  hath    he 

Digitized  by 


71 


Google 


72 


MARK,    VI. 


•  Sy.  )!ilM 


*  or,  tn  his 
house. 


•^  or,  small  coins. 


•Sy.'ljA 


*  Sy.  house  of 

prisoners. 
^  L  e.  to  xoife. 


obtained  these  things?    And,  what  wistlom  is  this, 
which  is  given  to  him  I   and  that  such  mighty 
works<^  are  done  by  his  hands  I     (3)  Is  not  this    8 
the  carpenter,  the  son  of  Mary,  and  the  brother  of 
James  and  of  Joses  and  of  Judas  and  of  Simon  ? 
And  are  not  his  sisters  here  with  us?    And  they 
were  stumbled  in  him.    (4)  And  Jesus  said  to    4 
them:  There  is  no  prophet  who  is  little,  except 
in  his  own  city,  and  among  his  kindred,  and  at 
home.*»     (5)  And  he  could  not  there  do  even  one    5 
mighty  work,  except  that  he  laid  his  hand  on  a 
few  sick,  and  healed  them.    (6)  And  he  wondered    6 
at  the  defect  of  their  faith.     And  he  travelled 
about  the  villages  and  taught 

And  he  called  his  twelve,  and  began  to  send    7 
them  forth,   two  and  two;    and  he  gave  them 
authority  over  unclean  spirits,  to  cast  them  out. 
(8)  And  he  commanded  them  to  take  nothing  for    8 
the  journey,  except  a  staff  only ;  neither  a  wallet, 
nor  bread,  nor  brass®  in  their  purses ;  (9)  but  to    9 
be  shod  with  sandals,  and  not  put  on  two  coats. 
(10)  And  he  said  to  them:  Into  whatever  house  10 
ye  enter,  there  abide  till  ye  leave  the  plac^.     (11)  11 
And  whoever  will  not  receive  you,  nor  hear  you, 
when  ye  go  out  from  that  place  shake  off  the  dust 
that  is  under  your  feet,  for  a  testimony  to  them. 
Verily  I  say  to  you.  There  will  be  comfort  for 
Sodom  and  Gomorrah  in  the  day  of  judgment, 
rather  than  for  that  city.     (12)  And  they  went  12 
out  and  proclaimed,  that   [men]   should  repent. 
(13)  And  they  cast  out  many  demons,  and  many  18 
of  the  sick  they  anointed  with  oil,  and  healed  them. 

And  Herod  the  king  heard  of  Jesus, — ^for  his  14 
name  had  become  known  to  him, — ^and  he  said: 
John  the  Baptizer  hath  risen  from  the  dead:  and 
therefore  it  is,  mighty  deeds^  are  done  by  him. 
(15)  Others  said :  He  is  Elijah :«  and  others :  He  15 
is  a  prophet,  like  one  of  the  prophets.    (16)  But  16 
when  Herod  heard  [of  him],  ue  said :  He  is  that 
John  whose  head  I  struck  off:  he  is  risen  from  the 
dead.     (17)  For  Herod  had  seat  and  seized  John,  17 
and  bound  him  in  prison,^  on  account  of  Herodias, 
his  brother  Philip  s  wife,  whom  he  had  taken.fir 
(18)  For  John  had  said  to  Herod :  It  is  not  lawftd  18 
for  thee  to  take  thy  brother's  wife.     (19)  And  19 
Herodias  herself  was  an  enemy  to  him,  and  wished 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   VL 

20  to  kill  lum,  but  was  not  able.  (20)  For  Herod 
was  a&aid  of  John,  because  he  knew  him  to  be  a 
just  and  holy  man:  and  he  observed  him,  and 
gave  ear  to  him  in  many  things  and  did   [the 

21  thii^],  and  he  heard  him  with  satisfaction.  (21) 
And  there  was  a  noted  dav,  when  Herod  made 
a  supper,  in  the  house  of  his  nativity,  for  his 
nobles  and  the  chiliarchs  and  the  chiefs  of  Galilee. 

22  (22)  And  the  daughter  of  Herodias  came  in,  and 
danced ;  and  she  pleased  Herod  and  those  reclining 
with  him.  And  the  king  said  to  the  maid :  Ask 
of  me  what  thou  pleasest,  and  I  will  give  it  thee, 

23  (23)  And  he  swore  to  her :  Whatever  thou  shalt 
ask,  I  will  give  thee,  even  to  the  half  of  my  king- 

24  dom.  (24)  And  she  went  out,  and  said  to  her 
mother:  What  shall  I  ask  of  him?     She  said  to 

25  her:  The  head  of  John  the  Baptizer.  (25)  And 
she  soon  entered  with  eagerness  to  the  king,  and 
said:  I  desire  that  thou,  mis  hour,  give  me  in  a 

26  dish  the  head  of  John  the  Baptizer.  (26)  And  it 
pamed  the  king  greatly ;  yet,  on  account  of  the 
oath,  and  on  account  of  the  guests,  he  would  not 

27  denyh  her :  (27)  and  the  king  sent  immediately  an 
executioner,'  and  commanded  [him]  to  bring  the 
head  of  John.     And  he  went,  and  struck  off  the 

28  head  of  John  in  the  prison ;  (28)  and  brought  it 
on  a  dish,  and  gave  it  to  the  maid ;  and  the  maid 

29  gave  it  to  her  mother.  (29)  And  his  disciples 
heard  [of  it] ;  and  they  came  and  took  up  the 
corpse,  and  laid  it  in  a  sepulchred 

80      And  the  legates^  assembled  before  Jesus,  and 

told  him  all  they  had  done,  and  all  they  had 

31  taught    (31)  And  he  said  to  them :  Gome,  let  us 

fo  into  a  desert  by  ourselves,  and  rest  a  little, 
'or  there  were  many  gping  and  coming,  and  they 

82  had  not  opportunity  even  to  eat  bread.  (32)  And 
thev  went  by  ship  to  a  desert  place  by  themselves. 

88  (33)  But  many  saw  them,  as  they  departed,  and 
knew  them ;    and  from  aU  the  cities,   they  ran 

84  thither  by  land  before  him.  (34)  And  Jesus  dis- 
embarked and  saw  great  multitudes :  and  he  com- 
passionated them,  because  they  were  like  sheep 
having  no  shepherd.     And  he  began  to  teach  them 

86  many  things.  (35)  And  when  the  tin*e  was 
advanced,'"  his  oisciples  came  to  him,  and  said  to 
him ;  This  is  a  desert  place,  and  the  time  is  ad- 


73 


Sy. 

=  Gr. 

24r8xouX&r6dp. 

*  or,  place  qf 
burial 

Gr.  (l4r6(foXoi. 


'By.  great 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74 


Sy.]fiD>a^ 


8y. 


.1  .g<rt  <-» 


Sy. 


•  Sy.  torturing. 


*  Sy.  thick. 


MARK,   VL 

yanced.     (36^  Dismiss  them,  that  they  may  go  86 
into  the  fielas^^  around  ns  and  into  the  yillages, 
and  may  buy  themselyes  bread;   for  they  haye 
nothing  to  eat    (ST)  And  he  said  to  them :  Qiye  87 
ye  them  to  eat    They  say  to  him :  Shall  we  go 
and  buy   bread  of  the    yalue  of  two  hundred 
denarii,®  and  giye  them  to  eat?    (38)  And  he  said  38 
to  them :  Go,  see  how  many  loayes  ye  haye  here. 
And  when  they  had  seen,  they  say  to  him:  Fiye 
loayes  and  two  fishes.    (39)  And  he  bid  them  39 
make  the  people  recline  on  the  grass  by  companies. 
(40^  And  they  reclined,  by  companies  of  a  hundred,  40 
ana  of  fifty.    (41)  And  he  took  the  fiye  loayes  41 
and  the  two  fishes,  and  looked  towards  heayen, 
and  blessed  and  brake  the  bread,  and  gaye  to  his 
disciples  to  set  before  them:   and  they  diyided 
[also]  the  two  fishes  among  them  all.    (42)  And  42 
they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied.    (43)  And  they  43 
took  up  twelye  baskets?  full  of  the  fragments 
and  of  the  fishes.     (44)  And  they  who  had  eaten  44 
bread  were  fiye  thousand  men.     (45)  And  he  im-  45 
mediately  constrained  his  disciples  to  take  ship, 
and  go  iJefore  him  to  the  other  side,  to  Bethsaida,' 
while    he  dismissed  the  multitudes. — (46)    And  46 
when  he  had  dismissed  them,  he  went  to  a  moun- 
tain to  pray.    (47)  And  when  eyeninff  came,  the  47 
ship  was  in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  and  he  alone  on 
the  land.    (48)  And  he  saw  them  straining*  them-  48 
selyes  in  rowing ;  for  the  wind  was  against  them. 
And  in  the  fourth  watch  of  the  night,  Jesus  came 
to  them  walking   on  the   waters;    and  he  was 
disposed  to  pass  by  them.     (49)  And  they  saw  49 
him  walking  on  the  waters,  and  they  supposed 
that  the  appearance  was  a  spectre :  and  they  cried 
out.     (60)  JFor  they  all  saw  him,  and  were  atedd.  50 
And  immediately  he  spoke  with  them,  and  said  to 
them :  Take  courage ;  it  is  I ;  fear  not    (51)  And  51 
he  entered  into  the  ship  to  them;  and  the  wind 
ceased.      And    they  were    greatly  amazed,   and 
astonished  among  themselyes.     (52)  For  they  did  52 
not  learn  by  the  bread ;  because  their  heart  was 
stupid.* — (53)  And  when  they  had  passed  to  the  53 
other  shore,  they  came  to  the  land  of  Gennesaret^ 
(54)  And  when  they  went  out  of  the  ship,  immedi-  54 
ately  the  men  of  the  place  knew  him.    (65)  And  56 
they  ran  through  all  that  region,  and  began  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,    VU. 


76 


bring  forth  them  that  were  sick,  bearing  them  on 
66  beds  to  where  they  heard  he  was.  (56^  And 
wherever  he  entered  into  villages  or  cities,  tne  sick 
were  laid  in  the  streets :  and  they  besought  him, 
that  they  might  touch  but  the  extremity  of  his 
raiment  And  all  they  that  touched  him,  were 
healed. 

VJL    And  there  gathered  about  him  Pharisees  and 

2  Scribes,  who  had  come  from  Jerusalem.  (2^  And 
they  saw  some  of  his  disciples  eating  breaa,  with 

3  their  hands  unwashed ;  and  they  censured  it.  (8) 
For  all  the  Jews  and  the  Pharisees,  unless  they 
carefully  wash  their  hands,  do  not  eat;  because 

4  they  hold  fast  the  tradition  of  the  Elders.  (4)  And 
[coming]  from  the  market-place,  except  they  bap- 
tize,* thev  do  not  eat.  Ana  there  are  many  other 
things  wnich  they  have  received  to  observe,  [such 
as]  the  bapti8ms*>  of  cups,  and  of  pots,  and  of 

5  brazen  vessels,  and  of  couches.  (5')  And  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  asked  him :  Wny  walk  not 
thy  disciples  according  to  the  tradition  of  the 
Elders,  but  eat  bread  with  their  hands  unwashed? 

6  (6)  And  he  said  to  them:  Well  did  Isaiah  the 
prophet  prophecy  concerning  you,  ye  hypocrites; 
as  it  is  written :  This  people  honoreth  me  with  its 

7  lips,  but  their  heart  is  very  far  from  me.  (7)  And 
in  vain  do  they  give  me  reverence,  while  teaching 

8  as  doctrines  the  precepts  of  men.  (8)  For  ye  have 
forsaken  the  commandment  of  God,  and  hold  feat 
the  tradition  of  men,  the  baptisms  of  cups,  and  of 

9  pots,  and  many  things  like  these.  (9)  He  said 
[also]  to  them :  Full  well  do  ye  spurn  the  precept 

LO  of  God,  that  je  may  establish  your  tradition  I  (10) 
For  Moses  said:  Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother; 
and  whoever  shall  revile  his  father  or  his  mother, 

11  shall  surely  die.©  (11)  But  ye  say :  If  a  man  say 
to  his  father  or  to  ids  mother.  Be  it  my  oblation, 

12  whatever  thou  mayest  gain  from  me :  (12)  then  ye 
suffer  him  not  to  do  any  thing  for  his  father  or  his 

13  mother.  (13)  And  ye  reject  the  word  of  God,  on 
account  of  the  tradition  which  ye  hand  down. 

14  And  many  things  like  these,  ye  do.— (14)  And 
Jesus  called  all  the  multitude,  and  said  to  them: 

15  Hear,  all  ye;  and  understand.  (15)  There  is 
nothiiig  without  a  man  which,  by  entering  him,  can 


•  Sy.  ^^ 

»•  Sy. 


or,  dyv^  iit 


Digitized  by 


Google 


76 


MARK,    Vll. 


^w^  parable. 


'  or^  iL 


Sy. 


*  87.  ward. 


Sy.  the  ten  cit- 
ies. 


'  Bf.  «^A2>Z1 


pollute  him.     But  that  which  cometh  out  of  him, 
that  it  is  that  poUuteth  a  man.     (16)   Whoever  16 
hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. — (17)  And  when  17 
Jesus  had  entered  the  house,  apart  from  the  multi- 
tude, his  disciples  asked  him  about  this  similitude.^ 
(18)  And  he  said  to  them:   Are  ye  likewise  so  18 
undisceming?     Do  ye  not  know,  that  whatever 
from  without  entereth  into  a  man,  cannot  defile 
him?    (19)  For  it  doth  not  enter  into  his  heart,  19 
but  into  his  bell^,  and  is  thrown  into  the  diges- 
tive process,  which  carries  off  all  that  is  eaten. 
(20)  But  that  which  proceedeth  from  a  man,  that  20 
denleth  a  man.     (21)  For  from  within,  from  the  21 
heart  of  men,  proceed   evil  thoughts,  adultery, 
whoredom,    (22)   theft,   murder,   avarice,  malice,  22 
deceit,  lasciviousness,  an  evil  eye,  reviling,  haugh- 
tiness, folly.    (23)  All  these  evil  things  come  from  23 
within,  and  defile  a  man. 

Thence  Jesus  arose,  and  went  to  the  border  of  24 
Tyre  and  Sidon.     And  he  entered  a  house,  and 
wished  no  man  to  know  him;«  but  he  could  not 
be  concealed.      (25)    For  immediately  a  woman,  25 
whose  daughter  had  an  unclean  spirit,  heard  of 
him;  and  sue  came,  and  fell  before  his  feet,  (26)  26 
(the   woman  was  a  Gentile   from   Phenicia    01 
Syria),  ^  and  besought  him,  that  he  would  expel 
the  demon  from  her  daughter,     (27)   Jesus  said  27 
to  her:   Permit  the  children  first  to  be  satisfied; 
for  it  is  not  becoming,   to   take  the  children's 
bread  and  cast  it  to  dogs.     (28)  And  she  replied,  28 
and  said  to  him:   Yes,  my  Ijord:   and  yet  the 
dogs  under  the  table  eat  the  children's  crumbs. 
(29)  Jesus  said  to  her :  Go  thou ;  because  of  this  29 
speech, «    the    demon    hath    departed    from   thy 
daughter.     (30^  And  she  went  to  her  house,  and  80 
found  her  daugnter  lying  on  a  bed,  and  the  demon 
gone  from  her. 

Again  Jesus  departed  from  the  border  of  Tyre  81 
and  Sidon,  and  came  to  the  sea  of  Gttlilee,  to  the 
border  of  Decapolis.**    (32)  And  they  brought  to  82 
him  a  deaf  and  stammering  man,  and  besought 
him  to  lay  his  hand  on  him.   (33)  And  he  led  mm  83 
aside  from   the   multitude,  and  put   his   fingers 
into  his  ears,  and  spit,  and  touched  his  tongue, 
(34J  and  looked  towards  heaven,  and  sighed,  and  84 
said  to  him :  Be  opened.'    (85)  And  immediately  86 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,    VIIL 


n 


his  ears  were  opened,  and  the  bond  of  his  tongue 
86  was  loosed,  and  he  spake  plainly.  (36)  And  he 
charged  them  to  tell  no  man  of  it:  and  the 
more  he  charged  them,  the  more  they  proclaimed 
37  it.  (37)  And  they  admired  exceedingly,  and  said: 
He  doeth  every  thing  excellently:  he  maketh 
the  deaf  to  hear,  and  the  speechless  to  talk. 

VIIL    And  in  those  days,  when  the  multitude  was 
great,  and  had  nothing  to  eat,  he  called  his  dis- 

2  ciples,  and  said  to  them :  (2)  I  compassionate  this 
multitude ;  for,  lo,  three  days  have  tney  continued 

8  with  me,  and  tbey  have  nothing  to  eat.  (3)  And 
if  I  send  them  to  their  homes  fasting,  they  will 
faint  by  the  way :   for  some  of  them  have  come 

4  from  a  great  distance.  (4)  His  disciples  say  to 
him :  Whence  can  one,  here  in  the  desert,  satisfy 

6  all  these  with  bread?    (5)  And  he  asked  them 
How  many  loaves  have  ye?     They  sav  to  him, 

6  Seven.  (6)  And  he  directed  the  multitudes  to 
recline  on  the  ground:  and  he  took  the  seven 
loaves,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  ti)  his 
disciples  to  set  forth;   and  they  set  before  the 

7  multitudes.  (7^  And  there  were  a  few  fishes; 
and  them  he  also  blessed,  and  ordered  them  set 

8  forth.  (8)  And  they  ate,  and  were  satisfied:  and 
they  took   up  seven  baskets  of   the    remaining 

9  fragments.  (9)  And  the  men  who  had  eaten, 
were  about  four  thousand:    and   he  sent  them 


10 


away. 


And  immediately  he  entered  a  ship,  with  his 
disciples,  and    came  to  the    place  Dalmanutha.^ 

11  (11)  And  the  Pharisees  came  out,  and  began  to 
dispute  with  him;   and,  to  tempt  him,  they  de- 

12  manded  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven.  (12)  And 
he  sighed  with  his  breath, *>  and  said:  Why  doth 
this  generation  seek  after  a  sign?  Verily  I  say 
to  you,  No  sign  will  be  given  to  this  generation. 

18  (13)  And  he  left  them,  and  embarked  in  the 
14  ship;   and  they  passed  to  the  other  shore. — (14) 

And  they  had  forgotten  to  take  bread  with  them, 

and  had  but  a  single  cake^-  in  the  ship  with 
16  them.     (15)   And  he  charged  them,  and  said  to 

them:  Take  heed,  and  beware  of  the  leaven  of 
16  the  Pharisees,  and  of  the  leaven  of  Herod.     (16) 

And  they  reasoned  one  with  another,  and  said 


% 


3ia^ 


^Sj.tpkriL 


•Sy.lZy^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


78 


MARK,    VIII. 


1^  AaO 


e  Gr.  Peter, 


'   Sy.  the  word. 
8  Gr.  P«ter. 

^  Gr.  Peter. 


It  is,  because  we  have  no  bread.    (17)  And  Jesus  17 
knew  [it],  and  said  to  them:    Why  reason  ye, 
because  ye  have  no  bread  ?    Do  ye  still  not  know, 
nor  understand?     How  long  will  your  heart  be 
hard?     (18)   and    ye  have  eyes,    but  see  not?  18 
and  have  ears,  but  hear  not,  nor  reflect?     (19)  19 
When  I  broke  the  five  loaves  to  five  thousand, 
how  many  baskets  full  of  the  fragments  took  ye 
up?    They  say  to  him:  Twelve.    (20)  He  saith  20 
to  them :  And  when  the  seven  to  four  thousand, 
how  many  baskets  full  of  the  fragments  took  ye 
up?    They  say:  Seven.    (21)  He  saith  to  them:  21 
Why  is  it  that,  to  this  time,  ye  do  not  consider  ? 

And  he  came  to  Bethsaiaa  'A  and  they  brought  22 
to  him  a  blind  man,  and  besought  him  to  touch 
him.     (23)    And  he  took  the  blind  man  by  the  23 
hand,  and  led  him  out  of  the  village,  and  spit 
on  his  eyes,  and  laid  on  his  hand :  and  asked  him, 
what  he  saw.     (24)   And  he  gazed,  and  said:   I  24 
see  men  like  trees  which  walk.     (25)   Again  he  25 
laid  his  hand  on  his  eyes,  and  he  was  recovered, 
and  saw  every  thing  plainly.     (26)  And  he  sent  26 
him   to   his  house,   and  said   to   him:    Neither 
enter  into  the  village,  nor  tell  any  persoij  in  the 
village. 

And  Jesus  and  his  disciples  went  to  the  villages  27 
of  Csdsarea  Philippi.     And  he  asked  his  disciples 
by  the  way,  ancl  said  to  them :  Who,  do  men  say 
of  me,  that  I  am  ?    (28J  And  they  said  to  him :  28 
That  [thou  art]  John  tne  Baptizer;   and  others: 
That  [thou  art]  Elijah;  and  others:  That  [thou 
art]  one  of  the  prophets.    (29)  Jesus  said  to  them :  29 
And  who,  do  ye  yourselves  say  of  me,  that  I  am? 
Simon®  replied,  and  said  to  him:   Thou  art  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  living  God.     (30)  And  he  30 
charged  them,  that  they  should  say  [this]  of  him  to 
no  person. — (31)    And  he  began  to  teach  them,  81 
that  the  Son  of  man  was  about  to  suffer  much,  and 
be  rejected  by  the  Elders  and  by  the  chief  priests 
and  by  the  Scribes,  and  be  killed,  and  rise  on  the 
third  day.    (32)  And  he  spoke  out  the  thing^  dis-  32 
tinctly.     And  Cephas?  took  him,  and  began  to 
rebuke  him.      (33)    But  he  turned,  and  looked  88 
upon  his  disciples,  and  rebuked  Simon,  ^  and  said : 
Get  thee  behind  me,  Satan:*   for  thou  dost  not 
consider  what  is  of  God,  but  what  is  of  men  — 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,    IX. 


79 


34  (34)  And  Jesiis  called  the  multitude,  together  with 
his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Whoever  will  come 
after  me,  let  him  deny  himself  and  take  up  his 

35  cross,  and  come  after  me.    (86)  For,  whoever  will 

{)reserve  his  life,^  shall  lose  it ;  and  whoever  will 
ose  his  life  on  my  account,  and  on  account  of  my 

36  tidines,^  shall  preserve  it.  (86)  For,  what  will  a 
man  be  profited,  if  he  gain  the  whole  world,  «»>  and 

37  lose  his  life  ?"     (87)  Or  what  will  a  man  give  in 

38  exchange  for  his  life?  (88)  For,  whoever  shall 
be  ashamed  of  me,  and  of  my  words,®  in  this  sinful 
and  adulterous  generation,  of  him  also  will  the 
Son  of  man  be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the 

IXglorv  of  his  Father,  with  his  holy  angels.— JIX.] 
And  he  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you.  There 
are  some  standing  here,  who  will  not  taste  of  death, 
vmtil  thejr  shall  see  the  kingdom  of  Qod  to  be 
coming  with  power. 

2  And  afl^er  six  days,  Jesus  took  Cephas*  and 
James  and  John,  and  led  them  to  a  high  moun- 
tain, apart;   and  was  transformed  before  them,** 

8  (3)  And  his  raiment  shone,  and  was  very  white, 
like  snow,  so  as  men  on  earth  can  never  whiten. 

4  (4^    And    there    appeared    to    them    Moses  and 

5  Elijah,  in  conversation  with  Jesus.  (5)  And 
Cephas©  said  to  him:  Rabbi,  it  is  delightful  for  us 
to  be  here.  And  let  us  make  three  booths ;  one 
for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses,  and  one  for  Elijah. 

6  (6)  But  he  did  not  know  what  he  said,  for  they 

7  were  in  trepidation.  (7)  And  there  was  a  clouA 
and  it  overshadowed  them.  And  a  voice  issuea 
fi'om  the  cloud,  which  said :  This  is  my  beloved 

8  Son.  Heai*  ve  him.  (8)  And  suddenly,  when  the 
disciples  looked  up,  they  saw  no  one  with  them, 

9  except  Jesus  only.— (9)  And  as  they  descended  the 
mountain,  he  commanded  them  to  tell  no  man 
what  they  had  seen,  till  after  the  Son  of  maa 

10  should  be  risen  from  the  dead.  (10)  And  thev 
kept  that  saying  in  their  mind;<*  and  inquired. 
What  doth  this  saying  mean :  "  When  he  shall  1 

11  risen  from  the  dead  1'°  (11)  And  they  asked  him, 
and  said:    Why  then  do  the  Scribes  say,  that 

12  Elijah  must  first  come?  (12)  He  said  to  them: 
Elijah  [truly]  first  cometh,  to  prepare  all  things: 
and,  as  it  is  written  of  the  Son  of  man,  he  will 


k  Sy.  oIaJZU 

>  Sy.  «aZ|^^XZ) 
'  Sy  ]Vr>\v 

Sy.  cfLAi^U 

*  or,  teaebingM, 


Gr.  Peter. 

*>  Sy.  their  eyes 

«  Gr.  Peter. 


*  or,  among 
ihemHheti 


Digitized  by 


Google 


80 


MARK,   IX. 


*8y.]i^\V> 


Gr.  y^vof .  ^ 


suffer  much,  and  be  rejectei    (18)  But  I  say  to  13 
joTl:  That  Elijah  hath  come;  and  they  have  done 
to  him  all  that  they  desired,  as  it  was  written  of 
him. 

And  when  he  came  to  his  disciples,  he  saw  a  14 
great  multitude  with  them,  and  the  Scribes  dis- 
puting with  them.     (15)   And  immediately   the  15 
multitude  saw  him,  and  were  surprised :  and  they 
ran  and  saluted  him.     (16^   And  he  asked  the  16 
Scribes:    What  were  ye  disputing  with  them? 
(17)  And  one  of  the  multituae  replied,  and  said :  17 
Teacher,®  I  have  brought  to  thee  my  son,  who  hath 
a  spirit  that  will  not  speak,    (18)  And  wherever  18 
he  seizeth  him,  he  shaketh  ana  teareth  him :  and 
he  gnasheth  his  teeth,  and  pineth  away.     And  I 
spoke  to  thy  disciples,  to  cast  him  out ;  and  they 
could  not.   (19)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:  19 
0  incredulous  generation  I     How  long  shall  I  be 
with  you  ?  how  long  bear  with  you  ?    Bring  him 
to  me.    (20)  And  they  brought  him  to  him.    And  20 
when  the  spirit  saw  him,  immediately  he  shook 
him ;  and  he  fell  upon  the  ground,  and  wallowed 
and  foamed.   (21^  And  Jesus  asked  his  father,  how  21 
long  a  time  he  nad  been  thus.     He  said  to  him : 
Lo,  from  his  childhood.     (22)  And  many  times  it  22 
hath  thrown  him  into  the  fire,  and  into  the  water, 
to  destroy  him.     But,  if  thou  canst  do  any  thing, 
aid  me  and  have  compassion  on  me.     (23)  Jesus  28 
said  to  him :  If  thou  canst  believe;  every  thing  can 
be,  to  him  that  believeth.     (24)  And  immediately  24 
the  fiither  of  the  child  cried  out,  while  he  wept  and 
said :  I  believe ;  aid  thou  the  defect  of  my  fidth. 
(25)  And  when  Jesus  saw  that  the  people  were  25 
running  and  collecting  around  him,  he  rebuked  the 
unclean  spirit,  and  said  to  him :   Thou  deaf  and 
unspeaking  spirit,  I  command  thee,  come  out  of 
him;    and  no  more  enter  him.     (26)   And  the  26 
demon  cried  out  greatly,  and  bruised  him,  and 
came  out.    And  he  was  as  a  dead  person ;  so  that 
many  would  say,  he  is  dead.    (27)  And  Jesus  took  27 
him  by  the  hand,  and  raised  him  up.— (28)  And  28 
when  Jesus  entered  the  house,  his  msciples  asked 
him  privately:  Why  could  not  we  cast  him  out? 
(29)  He  saith  to  them  :  This  kind^  can  come  out,  29 
by  nothing  but  fasting  and  prayer. 

And  when  he  departed  n'om  there,  they  passed  80 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   IX. 

through  Gbdilee :  and  he  desired  that  no  one  might 
31  know  him.  (81J  For  he  taught  his  disciples,  and 
said  to  them:  The  Son  of  man  is  delivered  into 
the  hands  of  men,  and  they  will  kill  him ;  and 
when  he  is  killed,  on  the  third  day,  he  will  rise. 
82  (32^  But  thej  did  not  understand  that  speech;! 
ana  they  were  afraid  to  ask  him. 

33  And  they  came  to  Capernaum.  And  when  they 
entered  the  house,  he  asked  them :  What  disputed 

34  ye  among  yourselves  by  the  way  ?  (34)  And 
they  were  ^ent;  for  by  the  way  they  had  con- 
tended with  one  another,  which  should  be  the 

35  great  among  them.  (35)  And  Jesus  sat  down, 
and  called  the  twelve,  and  said  to  them  :  Whoever 
would  be  first,  let  him  be  last  of  all,  and  servitor 

36  to  alL  (36)  And  he  took  a  child,  and  set  him  in 
the  midst,  and  took  him  in  his  arms,  and  said  toj 

37  them :  (37)  Whoever  receiveth  one  in  my  name, 
like  this  child,  he  receiveth  me;  and  he  that 
receiveth  me,  receiveth  not  me  Fonly],  but  him 

38  that  sent  me. — (38)  John  said  to  nim :  Rabbi,  we 
saw  one  casting  out  demons  in  thy  name,  and  we 

39  forbad  him,  bemuse  he  adhereth  not  to  us.  (39) 
Jesus  said  to  them :  Forbid  him  not ;  for  there  is 
no  one  who  doeth  mighty  works^  in  my  name, 

40  that  can  readily  speak  evil  of  me.    (40)  Whoever 

41  therefore  is  not  against  you,  is  for  you.  (41)  For 
whoever  shall  give  you  to  drink  a  cup  of  water 
only,  on  the  ground  that  ye  are  Messiah's  [follow- 
ers], verily  I  say  to  you,  he  will  not  lose  his 

42  reward.  (42)  And  whoever  shall  cause  one  of 
these  little  ones  that  believe  in  me  to  stumble,  it 
were  better  for  him,  if  a  millstone  were  put  to  nis 

43  neck,  and  he  cast  into  the  sea.  (43)  And  if  thy 
hand  make  thee  offend,  cut  it  off:  it  is  better  for 
thee  to  enter  into  life  maimed,  than,  having  two 

44  hands,  to  go  into  hell  ;>    (44)   where  their  worm 

45  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.  (45) 
And  if  thy  foot  make  thee  offend,  cut  it  off:  it  is 
better  for  thee  to  enter  into  life  lamed,  than,  having 

46  two  feet,  to  fall  into  hell ;  (46)  where  their  worm 

47  dieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.  (47) 
And  if  th  V  eye  make  thee  offend,  pluck  it  out :  it 
is  better  ror  thee  to  enter  with  one  eye  into  the 
kingdom  of  God,  than,  having  two  eyes,  to  fisdl  into 

48  the  nell  of  fire  ;k  (48)  where  their  worm  dieth  not> 


81 


t  or.  word. 


^Sy.piM 


«Sy.]*n^ 


"Sf. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


82 


By.u:^ 


^gy.]if^NVn 

«Sy. 


MARK,    X. 

and  their  fire  is  not  extinguished.    (49)  For  every  49 
thing  will  be  salted  with  fire ;  and  every  sacrifice 
will  be  salted  with  salt.   (50)  Salt  is  a  good  thing:  50 
but  if  the  salt  become  insipid,  with  what  will  it  be 
salted?    Let  there  be  salt  in  you:  and  be  ye  in 
peace,  one  with  another. 

And  he  arose  fix)m  there,  and  came  to  the  border  X, 
of  Judaea,  on  the  other  side  the  Jordan.    And 
great  multitudes  came  to  him  there ;  and  again  he 
instructed  them,  as  he  was  accustomed. — (2)  And    i 
the  Pharisees  came  to  him,  and,  tempting  him, 
inquired  if  it  were  lawful  for  a  man  to  divorce 
his  wife.     (8)  He  said  to  them :  What  did  Moses    3 
command  you  ?    (4)  They  said :  Moses  permitted    4 
us  to  write  a  bill  of  divorce,  and  send  ^er]  away. 
(5)  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them :  On  account    5 
oi  the  hardness  of  your  heart,  Moses  wrote  you 
this  precept     (6)  But,  from  the  beginning,  God    6 
made  them  a  male  and  a  female.    (7)  Therefore    7 
shall  a  man  leave  his  father  and  his  mother,  and 
adhere  to  his  wife :  (8)  and  they  two  shall  be  one    8 
flesh.     Wherefore  they  are  not  two,  but  one  flesh. 
(9)   What  therefore  (jod  hath  conjoined,  let  not    9 
man  separate.     (10)  And  in  the  house,  the  disci*  10 
pies  asked  him  again  of  this  matter.    (11)  And  he  11 
said  to  them :  Whoever  shall  divorce  his  wife,  and 
take  another,  committeth  adultery.     (12)  And  if  a  12 
woman  shall  leave  her  husband,  and  marry  another, 
she  committeth  adultery. 

And  they  brought  little  children*  to  him,  that  13 
he  might  touch  them.     But  his  disciples  rebuked 
those  who  brought  them.    (14)  And  when  Jesus  14 
saw  it,  he  was  displeased ;  and  he  said  to  them, 
Suffer  little  children  to  come  to  me,  and  forbid 
them  not ;  for  of  those  like  them  is  the  kingdom 
of  God.    (15)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That  whoever  15 
doth  not  receive  the  kingdom  of  God,  like  a  little 
child,  shall  not  enter  it.     (16)  And  he  took  them  16 
in  his  arms,  and  laid  his  hand  on  them  and  blessed 
them. 

And  as  he  walked  in  the  way,  one  ran  and  fell  17 
upon  his  knees,  and  asked  him,  and  said :  Good 
Teacher, b   what    must. I  do,    to    inherit    eternal 
life?c    (18J  Jesus  saith  to  him:   Why  callest  thou  18 
me  goodr     There  is  none  good,  but  one,  God. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   X. 

1 9  (19)  Thou  knowest  the  commandments ;  thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery,  thou  shalt  not  sted,  thou  shalt 
not  kill,  thou  shalt  not  give  false  testimony,  thou 
shalt  not   defraud;    honor  thy  father    and    thy 

20  mother.  (20)  And  he  answered,  and  said  to  him : 
Teacher,  all  these  have  I  kept  from  my  childhood. 

21  (21)  And  Jesus  looked  on  him,  and  loved  him, 
and  said  to  him :  One  thing  thou  lackest.  Go,  sell 
all  that  thou  possessest,  and  give  to  the  poor,  and 
there  will  be  a  treasure  for  thee  in  heaven ;  and 

22  take  thy  cross,  and  come  after  me.  (22)  And  he 
was  made  sad  by  that  speech,^  and  went  away 

23  sorrowing:  for  he  possessed  great  riches.  (2^' 
And  Jesus  looked  upon  his  disciples,  and  said  to 
them :  How  hard  for  those  who  possess  wealth,  to 

24  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God!  (24)  And  the 
disciples  wondered  at  the  remark.®  And  Jesus 
replied  again,  and  said  to  them:  My  children, 
how  hard  it  is,  for  those  who  trust  in  riches,  to 

26  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  God.  (25)  It  is  easier 
for  a  camel  to  enter  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  for  a 

26  rich  man  to  enter  the  kingdom  of  God.  (26)  And 
they  wondered  the  more,  and  said  among  them- 

27  selves:  Who  can  obtain  lifel  (27)  And  Jesus 
looked  on  them  again,  and  said  to  them:  With 
men,  this  is  not  possible,  but  with  God  [it  is] ;  for 

28  with  God  all  things  are  possible.— (28)  And 
Cephas*"  began  to  say:   Lo,  we  have  left  every 

29  tinng,  and  have  cleaved  to  thee.  (29)  Jesus 
answered  and  said:  Verily  I  sav  to  you.  There  is 
no  man  that  leaveth  houses,  or  brothers  or  sisters, 
or  father  or  mother,  or  wife  or  children,  for  my 

30  sake,  and  for  the  sake  of  my  tidings,  (30)  who  will 
not  receive  a  hundredfold,  here  in  the  present 
time, — ^houses,  and  brothers  and  sisters,  and  mothers 
and  children,  and  lands,  with  persecution ;  and  in 

31  the  world  to  come  eternal  life.  (81)  But  many 
are  first,  who  will  be  last;  and  last,  [who  will  be] 
first. 

32  And  as  they  were  in  the  way,  going  up  to  Jerusa- 
lem, Jesus  went  before  them:  and  they  were 
amazed,  and  walked  after  him  with  trembling. 
And  he  took  his  twelve,  and  began  to  tell  them 

33  what  was  to  befall  him.  (33)  Behold,  we  are 
ffoing  to  Jerusalem ;  and  the  Son  of  man  will  be 
delivered  up  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  Scribes ; 


83 


d  or,  tvord. 


*  or,  word. 


^  Gr.  Peter, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


84 


M ARKy   X« 


«^Hy.  )l^\SO 


^  Sy.  XmJi 


Sy.  ^iVli^ 


and  thej  will  condemn  him  to  die,  and  will  deliyer 
him  over  to  the  Gtentiles.     (34)   And  they  will  84 
mock  him,  and  will  scourge  him,  and  will  spit  in 
his  face,  and  will  kill  him ;  and  on  the  third  day 
he  will  arise.— (86)  And  James  and  John,  the  sons  86 
of  Zebedee,  came  to  him,  and  said  to  him :  Teacher,? 
we  desire  that  thou  wouldst  do  for  us  all  that  we 
ask.    (86)  He  saith  to  them:  What  would  ye,  that  86 
I  should  do  for  you?     (87)   They  say  to  him:  87 
Grant  to  us,  that  one  may  sit  on  thy  right  hand, 
and  the  other  on  thy  lefk,  in  thy  glory.     (88)  But  88 
he  said  to  them :  Ye  know  not  what  ye  ask.    Are 
ye  able  to  drink  the  cup,  of  which  I  drink  ?  and 
to  be  baptized  with  the  baptism,  that  I  am  baptized 
with?     (89)    They   sav  to  him:    We  are  able.  89 
Jesus  saith  to  them :  The  cup  that  I  drink,  je  will 
drink,  and  the  baptism  that  I  am  baptized  with,  ye 
will  be  baptized  with:    (40)  But  that  ye  should  40 
sit  on  my  right  hand  and  on  my  left,  is  not  mine 
to  give,  except  to  those  for  whom  it  is  prepared. 
(41)  And  when  the  ten  heard  [it],  they  began  to  41 
murmur  against  James  and  John.    (42)  And  Jesus  42 
called  them,  and  said  to  them:    Ye  know,  that 
they  who  are  accounted  chiefs**  of  the  nations,  are 
their  lords ;  and  their  great  men  have  authority* 
over  them.     (48)   But  it  shall  not  be  so  among  43 
you:  but  he  that  would  be  great  among  you,  must 
be  a  servitor  to  you.     (44)  And  he  of  you  that  44 
would  be  first,  must  be  servant  to  every  one. 
(46)   And  also  the  Son  of  man  came,  not  to  be  45 
served,  but  to  serve ;  and  to  give  his  life  a  ran- 
som for  many. 

And  they  came  to  Jericho.     And  as  Jesus  went  46 
out  of  Jericho,  he  and  his  disciples  and  a  great 
multitude ;  Timeus,^  the  son  of  Timeus,  a  blind 
man,  was  sitting  by  the  side  of  the  way,  and  beg- 
ging.   (47)  And  he  heard  that  it  was  Jesus  the  47 
Nazarean ;  and  he  began  to  cry  out,  and  to  say : 
Thou  Son  of  David,  have  mercy  on  me.     (48)  48 
And  many  rebuked  him,  that  he  might  be  silent. 
But  he  cried  out  the  more,  and  said :  Thou  Son  of 
David,  have  mercy  on  me.     (49)  And  Jesus  stood-  49 
and  directed  him  to  be  called.     And  they  called 
the  blind  man,  and  said  to  him :  Take  courage : 
arise,  he  calleth  thee.    (60)   And  the  blind  man  50 
cast  off  his  garment,  and  arose,  and  went  to  Jesua 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XI. 


85 


51  (51)  Jesus  said  to  him :  What  wilt  thou,  that  I  do 
for  thee  ?   And  the  blind  man  said  to  him :  Rabbi, 

52  that  I  may  have  sight  (52)  And  Jesus  said  to 
him :  Go ;  thy  faith  hath  procured  thee  life.  And 
immediately  nis  sight  was  restored;  and  he  fol- 
lowed after  him. 

XJ.  And  as  thev  approached  Jerusalem,  near  by 
Bettiphage  and  Fethany,  at  the  mount  of  Olives, 

2  he  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  (2)  and  said  to  them : 
Go  ye  to  the  village  that  is  over  against  us,  and 
as  soon  as  ye  enter  it,  ye  will  find  a  colt  tied,  on 
which  no  person  hath  ridden :   loose  [him],  and 

8  bring  him  hither.  (3)  And,  if  any  one  say  to  you, 
Why  do  ye  this  ?  Say  ye  to  him :  Because  our 
Lord  hath  need  of  him.     And  immediately  he  will 

4  send  him  hither.  (4^  And  they  went,  and  they 
found  the  colt  tied,  oy  the  door,  without  in  the 

5  street.  And  as  they  were  loosing  piim],  (S)  some 
of  those  standing  there,  said  to  them :   Wnat  do 

6  ye,  untying  the  colt  ?  (6)  And  they  said  to  them, 
as  Jesus  had  commanded  them ;   and  ihey  per- 

7  mitted  them.  (7)  And  they  brought  the  colt  to 
Jesus,  and  cast  tneir  garments  upon  him,  and  set 

8  Jesus  upon  him.  (8)  And  many  spread  their  gar- 
ments m  the  way ;  and  others  cut  branches  from 

9  the  trees,  and  strewed  them  in  the  way.  (9)  And 
those  preceding  him,  and  those  following  him, 
shouted  and  said:  Hosanna:  Blessed  is  he  that 

10  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord.  (10)  And 
blessed  is  the  advancing  kingdom  of  our  father 

11  David.  Hosanna  in  the  highest  [heavens].  (11) 
And  Jesus  entered  Jerusalem  and  the  temple, 
•nd  surveyed  every  thing.  And  when  evening 
arrived,  he  went  out  to  Bethany  with  the 
twelve. 

12  And  the  following  day,  as  he  left  Bethany,  he 
IS  was  hungry :  (18)  and  he  saw  a  fig-tree  at  a  dis- 
tance, on  which  were  leaves,  and  he  came  to  it,  if 
he  could  find  somewhat  on  it.     And  when  he 
had  come,  he  foimd  on  it  only  leaves;   for  the 

14  time  of  figs  had  not  arrived.  (14^  And  he  said 
to  it:  Henceforth  and  for  ever,  let  no  man  eat 
fruit  from  thee:  and  the  disciples  heard  it    And 

15  they  came  to  Jerusalem.  (15)  And  Jesus  entered 
the  temple  of  Gk>d :  and  he  began  to  cast  out  thooe 


Digitized  by 


Google 


86 


Sy. 

01 1  r\\n  I 


k  Gr.  Peter. 


«  Sy.  tuord. 


MARK,   XL 

who  bought  and  sold  in  the  temple ;  and  he  over* 
turned  the  counters  of  the  money-brokers,  and  the 
seats  of  them  that  sold  doves.      (16)    And  he  16 
suffered  no  one  to  carry  goods  through  the  temple. 
(17)   And  he  taught  them,  and  said:    Is  it  not  17 
written,  My  house  shall  be  called  the  house  of 

Srayer  for  all  nations?    But  ye  have  made  it  a 
en  of  robbers.    (18)  And  the  chief  priests  and  18 
the  Scribes  heard  [him],  and  they  sought  how  they 
might  destroy  him ;  for  they  were  afraid  of  him, 
beSiuse  all  the  people  admired  his  doctrine. « — 
(19)  And  when  it  was  evening,  they  went  out  from  19 
the  city.    (20)  And  in  the  morning,  as  they  passed  20 
by,  they  saw  the  fig-tree  dried  up,  as  it  were,  from  its 
root.    (21)  And  Simon**  remembered,  and  said  to  21 
him:    Eabbi;    behold,    the   fig-tree   which    thou 
cursedst,  is  dried  up.    (22)  And  Jesus  replied,  and  22 
said  to  them:  Have  faith  in  God.    (28)  Verily  I  28 
say  to  you,  That  whoever  shall  say  to  this  moun- 
tain. Be  thou  removed,  and  &11  into  the  sea ;  and 
shall  not  doubt  in  his  heart,  but  shall  believe  that 
what  he  said  will  occur,  to  him  will  be  the  thing 
he  spoke.     (24)   Therefore  I  say  to  you,  That  24 
whatsoever  ye  shall  pray  and  ask  for,  believe  that 
it  will  be,  and  it  will  be  to  you.     (25)  And  when  25 
ye  stand  up  to  pray,  forgive  what  ye  have  against 
any  one ;  tnat  your  Father  whp  is  in  heaven  may 
also  forgive  your  offences.    (26)  For  if  ye  forgive  28 
not,  your  Father  also  who  is  in  heaven  will  not 
forgive  you  your  offences. 

And  they  came  again  to  Jerusalem.    And  as  he  27 
was  walking  in  the  temple,  the  chief  priests  and 
Scribes  and  Elders  came  to  him,  (28)  and  said  to  28 
him:  Bv  what  authoritv  doest  thou  these  things? 
And  wno  gave  thee  the  authority  to  do  these 
things  ?    (29)  And  Jesus  said  to  them :  I  also  will  29 
ask  you  one  thing,  <*  that  ye  may  tell  me,  and  I  will 
tell  you  by  what  authority  I  do  these  things.    (80)  80 
The  baptism  of  John,  whence  was  it  ?  from  heaven, 
or  from  men?    Tell  me.    (31)  And  they  reasoned  81 
with  themselves,  and  said:  If  we  should  say  to 
him.  From  heaven ;  he  will  say  to  us,  Why  then 
did  ye  not  believe  him?    (82)  But  if  we  should  82 
say,  From  men;   there  is  fear  from  the  people; 
for  they  have  all  held  John  to  be  truly  a  prophet 
(88)  And  they  answered,  and  said  to  Jesus :  We  8S 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XIL 


87 


do  not  know.    He  said  to  them :  Neither  do  I  tell 
yoii  bj  what  authority  I  do  these  thingg. 

Xn.  And  he  began  to  discourse  with  them  in  simili- 
tudes.»  A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
inclosed  it  with  a  hed^,  and  dug  in  it  a  wine  vat, 
and  built  a  tower  in  it,  and  put  it  into  the  hands 

2  of  husbandmen,  and  removea  to  a  distance.  (2) 
And  at  the  proper  time,  he  sent  his  servant  to  tne 
husbandmen,  to  receive  of  the  fruits  of  the  vine- 

S  yard.    {S)  And  they  beat  him,  and  sent  him  away 

4  empty.  (4)  And  again  he  sent  to  them  another 
servant;  and  him  also  they  stoned,  and  wounded. 

5  and  sent  him  away  under  indignities.  (5)  Ana 
again  he  sent  another;  and  him  tney  killed  And 
he  sent  many  other  servants,  some  of  whom  they 

6  beat,  and  some  they  killed.  (6)  At  last,  having  an 
only  and  dear  son,  he  sent  him  to  them ;  for  he 

7  said.  Perhaps  they  will  respect  my  son.  (^  But 
those  husbandmen  said  among  themselves :  This  is 
the  heir ;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and  the  inheritance 

8  will  be  ours.     (8)  And  ihey  took  him,  and  slew 

9  [him],  and  cast  [him]  out  of  the  vineyard.  (9J 
What  therefore  will  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  dor 
He  will  come  and  destroy  those  Jiusbandmen,  and 

10  transfer  the  vineyard  to  others.  (10)  And  have 
ye  not  read  this  scripture.  The  stone  which  the 
builders  rejected,  hath  become  the  head  of  the 

11  corner:  (11)  From  the  Lord,  was  this;  and  it  is 

12  wonderful  in  our  eyes? — (12)  And  they  sought  to 
apprehend  him,  but  were  afraid  of  the  people; 
for  they  knew  that  he  spoke  this  similitude  against 
them.    And  ihey  left  him,  and  went  away. 

13  And  they  sent  to  him  some  of  the  Scribes  and 
of  the  household  of  Herod,  to  ensnare  him  in  dis- 

14  course.  (14)  And  these  came,  and  asked  him: 
Teacher;**  we  know  that  thou  art  veracious,  and 
hast  no  fear  of  man ;  for  thou  regardest  not  the 
fece  of  men,  but  teachest  the  way  of  God  in  truth. 
Is  it  lawftd  to  give  capitation  money  to  Caesar;  or 

15  not?  Shall  we  give,  or  not  give?  (15)  And  he 
knew  their  wile,  and  said  to  them :  Wny  tempt  ye 

16  me  ?  Bring  me  a  denarius,  that  I  may  see  it  (16) 
And  they  brought  j^one]  to  him.  And  he  said  to 
them  :  Whose  is  this  image  and  inscription?  They 

17  said  to  him:  Caesar's.    0.7)  Jesus  said  to  them: 


•   or,  parables . 


gj  ]<  ^V^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


88 


MARK,   XIL 


SyJiei\V) 


What  is  Caesar's,  give  to  Cdssar ;  and  what  is  Qod'a^ 
jjgive]  to  God.     And  they  wondered  at  him. — (18)  18 
Then  came  to  him  Sadducees,  who  say  that  there 
is  no  resurrection ;  and  they  asked  him,  and  said : 
(19)  Teacher  ;c  Moses  wrote  to  us,  that  if  a  man's  19 
brother  die,  and  leave  a  widow,  but  leave  no 
children,  his  brother  shall  take  his  widow,  and 
raise  up  seed  to  his  brother.     (20)   There  were  20 
seven  brothers:   and  the  first  took  a  wife,  and 
died,  and  left  no  seed.    (21)  And  the  second  took  21 
her,  and  died,  and  he  also  left  no  seed :  and  the 
third  in  like  manner.     (22)  And  the  seven  took  22 
her,  and  left  no  seed.    Last  of  all,  the  woman  also    . 
died.     (23)  In  the  resurrection,  therefore,  of  which  28 
of  them  will  she  be  the  wife  ?     For  all  the  seven 
took  her.     (24)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Is  it  not  on  24 
this  account  that  ye  err,  because  ve  understand  not 
the  scriptures,  nor  the  power  of  God  ?     (25)  For  26 
when  they  rise  from  the  dead,  they  do  not  take 
wives,  nor  are  wives  given  to  husbands ;  but  they 
are  as  the  angels  that  are  in  heaven.     (26)  But  26 
concerning  the  dead,  that  thev  rise,  have  ye  not 
read  in  a  book  of  Moses,  how  Grod  said  to  him  from 
the  bush  :  I  am  the  God  of  Abraham,  and  the  God 
of  Isaac,  and  the  God  of  Jacob  ?    (27)  He  is  not  27 
the  God  of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living.     Ye,  there- 
fore, do  err  greatly. — (28)  And  one  of  the  Scribes  28 
came,  and  heard  them  as  they  discussed,  and  he 
saw  that  he  gave  them  an  excellent  answer ;  and 
he  asked  him.    Which  is  the  first  of  all  the  com- 
mandments?    (29)  Jesus  said  to  him:   The  first  29 
of  all  the  commandments  [is] :  Hear,  0  Israel ;  the 
Lord  our  God  is  one  Lord :  (30)  and  thou  shalt  80 
love  the  Lord  thy  God,  with  all  thj  heart,  and 
with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mmd,  and  with 
all  thv  might     This  is  the  first  commandment 
(31)  And  tne  second,  which  is  like  it,  [is] :  Thou  81 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor,  as  thyself.     There  is  no 
other  commandment  greater  than  these.    (32)  The  32 
Scribe  said  to  him :  Excellently!  Eabbi;  thou  hast 
spoken  the  truth ;  for  he  is  one  [God],  and  there  is 
no  other  beside  him.     (33)  And  for  a  man  to  love  88 
him,  with  all  the  heart,  and  with  all  the  mind,  and 
with  all  the  soul,  and  with  all  the  might ;  and  to 
love  his  neighbor,  as  himself;  is  better  than  all 
holocausts  and  sacrifices.      (34)   And  Jesus  per-  84 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XIIL 


89 


ceived  that  he  replied  wisely;  and  he  answered, 
and  said  to  him:  Thou  art  not  fer  from  the  king- 
dom of  God. — And  no  one  dared  again  to  question 
him. 
86  And  as  Jesus  was  teaching  in  the  temple,  he 
answered  and  said :  How  can  the  Scribes  say,  that 

86  Messiah  is  the  son  of  David?  (36^  For  David 
himself  saith,  by  the  Holy  Spirit :  The  Lord  said 
to  my  Lord ;  Seat  thyself  on  my  right  hand,  until 
I  place  thy  enemies  as  a  footstool  beneath  thy  feet. 

87  (37)  David  therefore  calleth  him  "My  Lord;"  and 
how  is  he  his  son  ?     And  all  the  multitude  heard 

88  him  with  pleasure.  (38)  And  he  said  to  them  in 
his  teaching  :^  Beware  of  the  Scribes,  who  choose 
to  walk  in  long  robes,  and  love  the  salutation  in 

39  the  streets,  (39)  and  the  chief  seats  in  the  syna- 

M)  gogues,  and  the  chief  couches  at  feasts.    (40)  They 

devour  the  houses  of  widows,  under  pretence  that 

they  prolong  their  prayers.     These  shall  receive  a 

41  greater  condemnation. — (41)  And  as  Jesus  sat 
over  against  the  treasury -room,  he  saw  how  the 
multitude  cast  money  into  the  treasury.     And 

42  many  rich  ones  cast  in  much.  (42)  And  a  poor 
widow  came,  and  cast  in  two  mites,  which  are  a 

43  brass  farthing.®  (43)  And  Jesus  called  his  disci- 
ples, and  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That 
this  poor  widow  hath  cast  into  the  treasury  more 

44  than  all  they  that  cast  in.  (44)  For  they  all  cast 
in  of  that  which  abounded  to  them,  but  she,  of  her 
poverty,  hath  cast  in  all  that  she  possessed,  the 
whole  of  her  property. 

XTTT.  And  as  Jesus  retired  from  the  temple,  one  of 
his  disciples  said  to  him:  Teacher;'  behold;   see 

2  these  stones,  and  these  structures  I  (2)  And  Jesus 
said  to  him:  Admirest  thou  these  great  structures? 
There  will  not  be  left  here  one  stone  upon  another, 

8  not  demolished.  (3)  And  as  Jesus  was  sitting  on 
the  mount  of  Olives,  over  against  the  temple,  Ce- 
phas** and  James  and  John  and  Andrew  asked  him,  ^  Gr.  Peier, 

4  privately:  (4)  Tell  us,  when  will  these  things  be? 
and  what  [will  be]  the  sign  that  these  things  ap- 

6  proach  their  consummation?  (5)  And  Jesus  be- 
gan to  say  to  them :  Beware,  that  no  one  mislead 

6  you :  (6)  for  many  will  come  in  my  name,  and  will 
say:    1  am  he.     And  they  will  mislead  many. 


Sy.  )jQl£L» 


Sy.  ]i^\Sn 


Digitized  by 


Google 


90 


MARK,   XIII. 


®  or,  gospeL 


(7)  But  when  ye  shall  hear  of  battles,  and  the    7 
rumor  of  battles,  be  not  afraid;  for  this  must  be; 
but  the  end  is  not  yet.     (8)  For  nation  will  rise    8 
against  nation,  and  kingdom  against  kingdom,  and 
there  will  be  earthquakes  in  several  places,  and  there 
will  be  famines  and  insurrections.     These  are  the 
beginning  of  sorrows. — (9)  And  take  heed  to  your-     9 
selves;  for  they  will  deliver  you  up  to  the  tribunals; 
and  ye  will  be  beaten  in  the  synagogues,  and  ye 
will  stand  before  kings  and  governors,  on  my  ac- 
count, for  a  testimony  to  them.     (10)  And  my  10 
tidings^  must  first  be  proclaimed  among  all  the 
nations.     (11)  And  when  they  shall  lead  you  to  11 
deliver  you  up,  be  not  solicitous  beforehand  what 
ye  shall  say,  neither  premeditate ;  but,  that  which 
shall  be  given  you  in  that  hour,  speak  ye :  for  it  is 
not  ye  that  speak,  but  the  Holy  Spirit.    (12^  And  12 
brotner  will  deliver  up  his  brother  to  deatn,  and 
the  father  his  son ;  and  children  will  rise  up  against 
their  parents,  and  will  kill  them.     (18)  And  ye  18 
will  be  hated  of  every  man,  on  account  of  my 
name.     But  whoever  shall  persevere  to  the  end, 
shall  live. — (14)  And  when  ye  see  the  profane  14 
sign  of  desolation,  which  was  mentioned  by  Daniel 
the  prophet,  standing  where  it  ought  not;— (let  him 
that  readeth,  understand;)  then  let  those  that  are 
in  Judaea,  flee  to  the  mountain :  (15)  and  let  him  15 
that  is  on  the  roof,  not  come  down  and  enter  [it], 
to  take  any  thing  from  his  house:  (16)  and  let  him  16 
that  is  in  the  field,  not  return  back  to  take  his 
clothing.   (17)  But,  woe  to  those  with  child,  and  to  17 
those  who  nurse  children,  in  those  days !   (18)  And  18 
pray  ye,  that  your  flight  be  not  in  winter.    (19)  For  19 
in  those  days  will  be  affliction,  such  as  hath  not 
been  from  the  beginning  of  the  creation  that  God 
made  until  now,  and  shall  not  be.   (20)  And,  unless  20 
God  should  shorten  those  days,  no  flesh  would  live. 
But,  on  account  of  the  elect  whom  he  hath  chosen, 
he  hath  shortened  those  days. — (21)  Then,  if  any  21 
one  shall  say  to  you:  Lo,  here  is  Messiah,  or  lo, 
there ;  give  not  credence.     (22)  For  false  Messiahs  22 
will  arise,  and  lying  prophets ;  and  they  will  give 
signs  and  wonders ;  and  will  deceive,  if  possible, 
even  the  elect.     (23)  But  take  ye  heed.    Lo,  I  28 
have  told  you  the  whole  beforehand. — (24)  And  in  24 
those  days,  after  that  affliction,  the  sun  will  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XIV. 


91 


Sy.  lAOM 


darkened ;  and  the  moon  will  not  give  her  light ; 

25  (26)  and  the  stars  will  fall  from  heaven;  and  the 

26  powers  of  heaven  will  be  shaken.  (26)  And  then 
will  they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  in  the  clouds, 

,27  with  great  power  and  glory.  (27)  And  then  will 
hei  send  forth  his  angel^  and  will  assemble  his  elect 
from  the  four  winds,  from  the  extremity  of  earth 

28  to  the  extremity  of  heaven. — (28)  And,  from  the 
fig-tree,  learn  ye  a  simile.^     When  its  twigs  are  ^  ^^p  aUegarif. 
tender,  and  its  leaves  bud  forth,  ye  know  that 

29  summer  approacheth.  (29)  So  also,  when  ye  shall 
see  these  occurrences,  know  ye,  that  it  is  near,  at 

30  the  door.  (30)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That  this 
generation^  shall  not  pass  away,  until  all  these 

31  things  occur.     (31)  Heaven  ana  earth  will  pass 

32  away,  but  my  words  will  not  pass  away. — (32)  JBut 
of  tnat  day  and  that  hour,  knoweth  no  man ;  nor 
the  angels  of  heaven;   neither  the  Son,  but  the 

33  Father.    (33)  Take  heed,  watch,  and  pray;  for  ye 

34  know  not  when  the  time  is.  (84)  For  it  is  as  a 
man,  who  took  a  journey,  and  left  his  home ;  and 
he  gave  authority  to  his  servants,  and  to  each  his 
service;    and   he  commanded   the  porter  ia  be 

36  watchful.  (35)  Watch  ye,  therefore ;  for  ye  know 
not  when  the  lord  of  the  house  cometh ;  at  even- 
ing, or  at  midnight,  or  at  the  cock-crowing,  or  in 

36  the  morning:  (36)  lest  he  come  suddenly,  and  find 

37  you  sleeping.  (37)  And  what  I  say  to  you,  I  say 
to  you  all :  Be  ye  watchful. 

XIV.  And  after  two  days,  was  the  passover  of  un- 
leavened cakes.  And  the  chief  priests  and  the 
Scribes  sought  how  they  might  take  him  by  strata- 

2  gem,  and  kill  him.  (2^  But  they  said:  Not  on 
tne  festival,  lest  there  oe  commotion  among  the 

8  peoplci— (3)  And  j^hen  he  was  at  Bethany  in  the 
house  of  Simon  the  leper,  as  he  reclined,  a  woman 
came  having  an  alabaster  box  of  precious  ointment 
of  spikenard,  of  great  price ;  and  she  opened  and 

4  poured  upon  the  head  of  Jesus.  (4)  And  there 
were  certain  of  the  disciples,  who  were  dissatisfied 
among  themselves,  and  said :  Why  was  this  waste 

5  of  the  ointment?  (5)  For  it  might  have  been  iold 
for  more  than  three  hundred  denarii,  and  been 
given  to  the  poor.     And  they  were  indignant  at 

6  ner.    (6)  But  Jesus  said:   Let  her  alone;   why 


Digitized  by 


Google 


92 


MARK,    XIV. 


trouble  je  her?    She  hath  done  an  excellent  act 
towards  me.    (7)  For  the  poor  ye  have  always    7 
with  you ,  and  when  ye  please,  ye  can  do  them 
kind  offices:    but   I  am  not  always  with  you. 
(8)  What  was  in  her  power,  she  hath  done ;  and    8 
liy  anticipation,  hath  perfumed  my  body,  as  if  for 
burial.    (9)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That  wherever    9 
this  my  gospel*  shall  be  proclaimed,  in  all  the 
world,**  this  also  which  she  hath  done  shall  be  told, 
in  memory  of  her. — (10)  And  Judas  Iscariot,  one  10 
of  the  twelve,  went  to  the  chief  priests,  in  order  to 
betray  Jesus  to  them.    (11)  And  when  they  heard  11 
[himj,  they  rejoiced;  and  they  promised  to  give 
him  money.     And  he  sought  for  opportunity  to 
betray  him. 

And  on  the  first  day  of  unleavened  cakes,  on  12 
which  the  Jews  slay  the  passover,  his  disciples 
said  to  him:  Where  wilt  thou  that  we  go,  and 

Erepare  for  thee  to  eat  the  passover?    Q3)   A.nd  18 
e  sent  two  of  his  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  Go 
ye  to  the  city,  and  behold,  there  will  meet  you  a 
man  bearing  a  pitcher  of  water.     Go  ye  after  him, 
(14)*and  where  he  entereth  in,  say  ye  to  the  lord  of  14 
the  house :  Our  Eabbi  saith,  Where  is  the  place  of 
refreshment,  in  which  I  may  eat  the  passover  with 
my  disciples?    (15^  And  lo,  he  will  show  you  a  16 
large  upper  room,  rurnished  and  prepared :  there 
make  ready  for  us.     (16)  And  his  disciples  went  16 
and  entered  the  city,  and  found  as  he  had  told 
them :  and  they  made  ready  the  passover.    (17)  And  17 
when  it  was  evening,  he  came  with  his  twelve. 
(18)  And  as  they  reclined  and  ate,  Jesus  said:  18 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  one  of  you  that  eateth 
with  me,  will  betray  me.    (19)  And  they  began  19 
to  be  distressed.     And  they  said  to  him,  one  bv 
one,  Is  it  I?    (20)  And  he  said  to  them:   It  is  20 
one  of  the  twelve  that  dippeth  with  me  in  the 
dish.     (21)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it  is  21 
written  of  him :  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom  the 
Son  of  man  is  betrayed.    Better  would  it  have 
been  for  that  man,  if  he  had  not  been  bom. — 
(22^  And  as  they  were  eating,  Jesus  took  bread.  22 
ana  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  them,  and  saia 
to  them :  Take ;  this  is  my  body.    (23)  And  he  28 
took  the  cup,  and  gave  tlianks,  and  blessed,  and 
gave  to  them.    And  they  all  drank  of  it    (24)  And  24 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK»  XIY. 


93 


Sy.  \otu} 


•Sy.^iOflD^ 


he  said  to  them:  This  is  my  blood  of  the  new 

testament,  c  which   is  shed    m  behalf  of  many. 

26  (25)  Verily  I  sav  to  you,  That  I  will  not  drink 

X'n  of  the  product  of  the  vine,  until  the  day  in 
^h  I  shall  drink  it  anew  in  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

26  And  they  sang  praise,  and  went  out  to  the 

27  mount  of  Olives.  (27)  And  Jesus  said  to  them: 
All  of  you  will  this  night  be  stumbled  in  me :  for 
it  is  written,  "  I  will  smite  the  shepherd,  and  his 

28  sheep  will  be  scattered."    (28)  And  when  I  am 

29  risen,  I  will  precede  you  into  Galilee.  (29)  And 
Cephas^  said  to  him :  Though  they  all  should  be  '  Gr  Pmr. 

80  stumbled,  yet  I  will  not  be.  (30)  Jesus  said  to 
him :  Verily  I  say  to  thee.  That  this  day,  on  this 
night,  before  the  cock  shall  crow  twice,  ihou  wilt 

31  thnce  deny  me.  (31)  And  he  said,  in  addition: 
If  I  were  to  die  with  thee,  I  will  not  deny  thee, 
my  Lord.     And  like  him,  spake  all  the  disciples. 

32  — H[32)  And  they  came  to  the  place  called  Geth- 
semane ;«  and  he  said  to  his  disciples,  Sit  ye  here, 

33  while  I  pray.  (33)  And  he  took  with  him  Cephas 
and  James  and  Jonn,  and  began  to  be  gloomy  and 

34  distressed.  (34)  And  he  said  to  them:  My  soul 
hath  anguish,  even  to  death.     Wait  for  me  here, 

35  and  be  watchful.  (35)  And  he  advanced  a  little, 
and  fell  upon  the  ground,  and  prayed  that,  if  it 
were  possible,  the  hour  might  pass  from  him. 

36  (36)  And  he  said :  Father,  my  Father,  thou  canst 
do  all  things.    Let  this  cup  pass  frx>m  me.    Yet 

37  not  my  pleasure,  but  thine.  (37)  And  he  came 
and  found  them  sleeping.  And  he  said  to  Cephas: 
Sleepest  jthou,  Simon?    Couldst  thou  not  watch 

88  with  me  one  hour?  (38)  Watch  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptation.    The  spirit^  is  willing  and 

89  ready,  but  the  bodyff  is  weak.  (39)  And  he  went 
again  and  prayed,  speaking  the  same  language. 

40  (40)  And  returning  he  came  again  and  found  them 
sleeping,  for  their  eyes  were  heavy.    And  they 

41  knew  not  what  to  say  to  him.  (41)  And  he  came 
the  third  time,  and  said  to  them :  Sleep  on  now, 
and  take  rest  The  end  is  near;  the  hour  is  oome; 
and  lo,  the  Son  of  man  is  betrayed  into  the  hands 

42  of  sinners.    (42)  Arise  ye ;  let  us  go.    Lo,  he  that 
48  betrayeth  me  is  at  hand.    (43)  And  while  be  was 

yet  speaking,  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  twelve, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


94 


MARK,   XIV. 


Sy.  ICLibO 


Or.  Peter. 


=  not  equoL 


^  or,  Hi  shirli 
OULftZoO 


arrived,  and  much  people,  with  swords  and  clubs, 
from  before  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes  and  Elders. 

(44)  And  the  traitor  who  betrayed  [him],  had  given  44 
them  a  sign,  and  said:  He  whom  I  shall  kiss  is 
the  man.     Seize  promptly,  and  lead  him  away. 

(45)  And  immediately  he  came  up,  and  said  to  45 
him:   Eabbi,  Eabbi;  and  kissed  him.     (46)  And  46 
they  laid  hands  on  him  and  took  him.     (47)  And  47 
one  of  them  that  stood  by,  drew  a  sword,  and 
smote  a  servaat  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his 
ear.    (48)  And  Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them :  48 
Have  ye  come  out  against  me,  as  against  a  robber, 
with  swords  and  clubs,  to  apprehend  me?     (49)  I  49 
was  daily  with  you,  while  i  taught  in  the  temple, 
and  ye  seized  me  not.     But  this  occurs,  that  the 
scriptures  may  be  fulfilled.     (50)  Then  his  disciples  50 
left  him  and  fled.     (51)  And  a  young  man  fol-  51 
lowed  after  him,  who  was  clad  with  a  linen  doth 
on  [his]  naked  [body] :  and  they  laid  hold  of  him. 
(52)  And  he  left  the  linen  cloth,  and  fled  naked.      52 

And  they  led  away  Jesus  to  Caiaphas*>  the  high  58 
priest.     And  with   him  were  assembled  all  the 
chief  priests  and  the   Scribes  and   the  Elders. 

(54)  And  Simon*  followed  after  him,  at  a  d^tance,  54 
into  the  hall  of  the  high  priest;  and  he  sat  with 
the  servants,  and  warmed  himself  by  the  fire. 

(55)  And  the  chief  priests  and  all  the  assembly  55 
sought  for  testimony  against  Jesus,  to  put  him  to 
death:   but  they  found  it  not    (56)  For  while  56 
many  testified  against  him,  their  testimonies  were 
inadequate.*^    (57)  And  some  fidse  witnesses  stood  57 
up  against  him,  and  said :  (58)  We  have  heard  him  58 
say:  I  will  destroy  this  temple,  which  is  made 
with  hands ;  and  in  three  days  I  will  build  another, 
not  made  with  hands.     (59)  Nor  even  thus  were  59 
their  testimonies  adequate.     (60)  And  the  high  60 
priest  arose  in  the  midst,  and  interrogated  Jesus, 
and  said:  Beturnest  thou  no  answer r     What  do 
these  testify  against  thee?    (61)  And  Jesus  was  61 
silent,  and  made  no  reply.     And  again  the  chief 
priest  interrogated  him,  and  said:  Art  thou  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed?    (62)  And  Jesus  62 
said  to  him :   I  am.     And  ye  will  see  the  Son  of 
man  sitting  on  the  ri^ht  hand  of  power,  and  he 
will  come  on  the  clou&  of  heaven.    (68)  And  the  6? 
high  priest  rent  his  tunic,^  and  said:  What  need 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XV. 

64  of  witnesses  have  we,  any  more?  (64^  Behold, 
from  his  own  month  ye  have  heard  blasphemy. 
How  doth  it  appear  to  you  ?     And  they  all  deci- 

85  ded,  that  he  deserved  to  die.     (65)  And  some  be- 

fan  to  spit  in  his  face,  and  to  buffet  him,  saying: 
^rophesy  thou.    And  the  servants  smote  him  on 

66  the  cheets. — (66)  And  as  Simon™  was  below  in  the 

67  court,  a  maid  of  the  high  priest  came,  (67)  and  saw 
him  warming  himself;  and  she  looked  upon  him, 
and  said  to  him:  And  thou  too  wast  with  Jesus 

68  the  Nazarean.  (68)  But  he  denied,  and  said:  I 
know  not  what  thou  sayest.     And  he  went  out 

69  into  the  porch;  and  the  cock  crew.  (69)  And 
the  maid  saw  him  again,  and  she  began  to  say  to 
those  standing  by,  This  man  also  is  one  of  them, 

70  (70)  And  he  again  denied  [it].  And  a  little  after, 
those  standing  there  said  again  to  Cephas:  Surelyj 
thou  art  one  of  them;   for  thou  art  likewise  a 

71  Galilean,  and  thy  speech  answers  to  it.  (71)  And 
he  began  to  imprecate,  and  swore:  I  know  not 

72  that  man,  of  whom  ye  speak.  (72)  And  immedi- 
ately the  cock  crew  the  second  time.  And  Simon 
remembered  the  declaration  of  Jesus,  who  said  to 
him :  Before  the  cock  shall  crow  twice,  thou  wilt 
thrice  deny  me.     And  he  began  to  weep. 

XV.  And  forthwith,  in  the  morning,  the  chief  priests 
with  the  Elders  and  the  Scribes,  and  the  whole 
Sanhedrim,  a  held  a  consultation.  And  they  bound 
Jesus,  and  led  him  away,  and  delivered  mm  over 

2  to  Pilate  the  president**  (2)  And  Pilate  asked 
him :  Art  thou  the  king  of  tne  Jews  ?    He  replied 

3  and  said  to  him:  Thou  hast  said.     (8)  And  the 

4  chief  priests  accused  him  of  many  things.  (4)  And 
Pilate  again  questioned  him,  and  said  to  him: 
Makest  thou  no  reply?      See  how  much  they 

6  testify    against    thee!     (5)    But  Jesus  gave   no 

6  answer;  so  that  Pilate  wondered  (6)  And  it  was 
his  custom,  at  each  festival,  to  release  to  them  one 

7  prisoner,  whom  they  might  desire.  (7)  And  there 
was  one  named  Bar  Abas,®  who  was  confined  with 
the  movers  of  sedition,  who  had  committed  murder 

8  in  the  insurrection.  (8)  And  the  people  clamored, 
and  began  to  demand,  that  he  should  ao  to  them  as 

9  he  was  a(*xjustomed.  (9)  And  Pilate  answered,  and 
said:  Will  ye,  that  I  release  to  you  the  king  of  the 


Digitized  by 


96 


■  Gr.  Piter. 


Sy. 


Sy.]£)l  ^ 


Google 


96 


^  Sy. 

Sy.  la^^CT)'), 
Gr.  (fflrsrpa. 


'Sy. 
»Sy. 


i.  6.  9  A.  M. 


MARK«   XV. 

Jews?   (10)  For  Pilate  knew  that  the  chief  priests,  10 
from  envy,  had  delivered  him  up.    (11)  But  the  11 
chief  priests  frirther  persuaded  the  multitudes,  that 
Bar  Abas  should  be  released  to  them.    (12)  And  12 
Pilate  said  to  them :  What  will  ye,  therefore,  that 
I  do  to  bim  whom  ye  call  king  of  the  Jews? 

(18)  And  they  again  cried  out:     Crucify  him.  18 
(14)  And  Pilate  said  to  them :  But  what  evil  hath- 14 
he  done?     And  they  cried  out  the  more:  Crucify 
him.    (15)  And  Pilate  was  willing  to  gratify  the  15 
wishes  of  the  multitudes ;  and  he  released  to  them 
Bar  Abas ;  and,  having  scourged  Jesus,  he  delivered 
him  to  them  to  be  crucified.— (16)  And  the  soldiers  16 
led  him  into  the  hall  which  was  the  Prsetorium  ;* 
and   they  called  together  the  whole   regiment;* 
(17)  and  they  clothed  him  in  purple,  and  braided  a  17 
tjrown  of  thorns  and  put  upon  nim;  (18)  and  began  18 
to  salute  him  with,  "Hail,  king  of  the  Jews!" 

(19)  And  they  smote  him  on  the  head  with  a  reed,  19 
and  spit  in  his  face,  and  bowed  upon  their  knees 
and  worshipped  him.    (20)  And  having  mocked  20 
him,  they  divested  him  of  the  purple,  and  clothed 
him  in  his  own  garments,  and  led  him  forth  to 
crucify  him. 

And  they  compelled  a  passer-by,   Simon   the  21 
Cyrenian,^  the  father  of  Alexander  and  Rufus,  who 
was   coming   from  the  fields,  to  bear  his  cross. 
(22)   And  they   brought  him  to  Golgotha,?  the  22 
place  which   is  interpreted  a  Skull.     (23)   And  28 
they  gave  him  to  drink  wine  in  which  mvrrh  was 
mixed;  and  he  would  not  receive  it.     (24)  And  24 
when  they  had  crucified  him,  they  divided  his 
garments ;  and  cast  the  lot  upon  them,  what  each 
should  take.     (25)   And  it  was  the  third  hour^'25 
when  they  crucified  him.    (26)  And  the  cause  of  26 
his  death   was  written  in  the  inscription:    Tms 
IS  THE  KING  OF. THE  Jbws.     (27)  And  they  era-  27 
cified  with  him  two  robbers,  the  one  on  his  right 
hand,  and  the  other  on  his  left.     (28)  And  the  28 
scripture  was  fulfilled  which  saith:   He  was  ac- 
counted among  the  wicked.     (29)  And  they  also  29 
that  passed  by,  reviled  him;   and,  nodding  their 
heads,  they  said:   Aha,  thou  that  destroyest  the 
temple  and  buildest  it  in  three  days,  (3(n  rescue  80 
thyself  and  come-down  from  the  cross.    (31)  And  81 
so  also  the  chief  priests,  jeering  one  with  another, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK,   XVL 


97 


and  the  Scribes,  said:  He  gave  life  to  others,  his 

32  own  life  he  cannot  save.  (32j  Let  Messiah,  the 
king  of  the  Jews,  now  descend  irom  the  cross,  that 
we  may  see  [it]  and  believe  in  him.  And  those 
also  who  were  crucified  with  him,  derided  him. — 

83  (S3)  And  when  the  sixth  hour*  was  come,  there 
was  darkness  over  all  the  land  until  the  ninth 

34  hour.k  (34)  And  at  the  ninth  hour,  Jesus  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  II,  H,  lemono  shebak- 
thone;^   that  is:    My  God,  my  God;   why  hast 

85  thou  forsaken  me  ?  (35)  And  some  of  them  that 
stood  by,  when  they  heard  it,  said:   He  calleth 

36  for  Elijah.  (36)  And 'one  ran  and  filled  a  spoujge 
with  vinegar,  and  tied  it  on  a  reed,  to  offer  him 
drink.     And  they    said:    Desist;   let  us  see  if 

57  Elijah  will  come  to  take  him  down. — (37)  And 
Jesus   cried   with  a  loud "  voice,   and  expired.™ 

38  (38)  And  the  curtain  of  the  door  of  the  temple  was 

39  rent,  firom  the  top  to  the  bottom.  (39)  And  when 
the  centurion,  who  was  standing  near  him,  saw 
that  he  so  cried  and  expired,  he  said :  Verily,  this 

to  was  the  Son  of  God.— (40)  And  there  were  women 
looking  on,  from  a  distance,  Marv  Magdalena.  and 
Mary  the  mother  of  James  the  less  and  of  Joses, 

41  and  Salome;  (41)  who,  when  he  was  in  Galilee 
adhered  to  him,  and  ministered  to  him;  and  many 
other  women,  who  had  come  up  with  him  to 
Jerusalem. 

42  And,  as  it  was  the  eve  of  preparation,  which 

43  precedeth  the  sabbath,  (43)  Joseph  of  Bamath,  an 
honorable  counsellor,  >>  who  also  nimself  waited  for 
the  kingdom  of  God,  came,  and  assuming  courage, 
went  to  Pilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 

44  (44)  And  Pilate  wondered  that  he  should  be 
already  dead.     And  he  called  the  centurion,  and 

45  inquired  if  he  had  been  any  time  dead.  (46)  And 
when  he  learned  it,  he  gave  his  body  to  Joseph, 

46  (46)  And  Joseph  bought  fine  linen,  and  took  it 
down,  and  wrapped  it  in  the  linen,  and  deposited 
it  in  a  sepulchre  that  was  hewed  in  a  rock,  and 
rolled  a  stone  against  the  door  of  the  sepulchre. 

47  (47)  And  Mary  Maedalena  and  Mary  [the  mother] 
of  Joses  saw  where  ne  was  laid. 

XVI.  And  when  the  sabbath  had  passed,  Mary 
Magdalena,  and  Mary  [the  mother]  of  James,  and 


or, 


k  orySr.K 

Sy. 

>  Sy.  So\»o 


1 


Sv. 
Gr. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


MARK.   XVL 


1^1 


^  or,  gospel. 
dSy.. 


6 


Salome,  bought  aromatios,  that  they  might  come 
and  anoint  him.  (2)  And  in  the  morning  of  the 
first  day  of  the  weeK,  thev  came  to  the  sepulchre 
as  the  sun  arose.  (S)  And  they  said  among  them- 
selves :  .Who  will  roll  back  for  us  the  stone  from 
the  door  of  the  sepulchre  ?  (4)  And  they  looked, 
and  saw  that  the  stone  was  rolled  away;  for  it 
was  very  great  (5)  And  entering  the  sepulchre, 
they  saw  a  youth  sitting  on  the  right  hand,  and 
clothed  in  a  white  robe :  and  they  were  in  pertur- 
bation. (6)  But  he  said  to  them :  Be  not  affiright- 
ed.  Ye  are  seeking  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  who  was 
crucified.  He  is  risen;  he  is  not  here.  Behold, 
the  place  where  he  was  laid.  (7)  But  go,  tell  his 
disciples  and  Cephas :  Lo,  he  precedeth  you  into 
Galilee :  there  will  ye  see  him,  as  he  said  to  you. 
(8)  And  when  they  heard,  they  fled  and  left  the 
sepulchre;  for  astonishment  and  trembling  had 
seized  them;  and  they  said  nothing  to  any  one, 
for  they  were  in  fear. — (9)  And  in  the  morning 
of  the  first  day  of  the  week,  he  arose;  and  he 
appeared  first  to  Mary  Magdalena,  from  whom  he 
had  cast  out  seven  demons.  (10)  And  she  went 
and  told  them  that  had  been  with  him,  while  they 
were  mourning  and  weeping.  (11)  And  they, 
when  they  heard  [the  women]  say  that  he  was 
alive,  and  that  he  had  appeared  to  them, — did  not 
believe  them.  (12)  After  this  he  appeared,  under  12 
another  aspect, »  to  two  of  them  as  they  walked 
and  went  into  the  country.  (13)  And  these  went  18 
and  told  the  rest;  but  they  would  not  believe 
them.  (14)  And  at  last,  he  appeared  to  the  eleven  14 
as- they  reclined  at  table;  and  he  reproved  the 
slendemess  of  their  faith,  and  the  hardness  of  their 
heart;  because  they  believed  not  those  who  had 
seen  him  actually  risen.  (15)  And  he  said  to  16 
them :  Go  ye  into  all  the  world,  and  proclaim  my 
tidings^  in  the  whole  creation.  (16)  He  that  16 
believeth,  and  is  baptized,  liveth®;  but  he  that 
believeth  not,  is  condemned.  <^  (17)  And  these 
signs  shall  attend  them  that  believe :  In  my  name, 
they  will  cast  out  demons;  and  in  new  tongues 
will  they  speak.  (18)  And  they  will  t^e  up 
serpents;  and  if  they  should  drink  a  deadly 
poison,  it  will  not  harm  them ;  and  they  will  lay 
their  hands  on  the  sick,  and  they  will  be  healed. — 


8 


9 


10 


11 


17 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  L 

19  (19^  And  Jesus,  our  Lord,  after  he  had  conversed 
witn  them,  ascended  to  neaven,  and  sat  on  the 

20  right  hand  of  God.— (20)  And  they  went  forth, 
and  preached  everywhere:  and  our  Lord  aided 
them,  and  confirmed  their  discourses  by  the  signs 
which  they  wrought 


Completian  cf  the  Holy  Oatpelf*  the^ 
wkikh  he  tUtered  and  prodaimed  in  ' 


of  Mark; 


99 


Sy. 
•Sy. 


The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Amumelation  of  Luke  the  EvanseM; 

whieh  he  ottered  and  preaehed,  in  Greek,  at  Great  Alexandria. 


L  SmoE  many  have  been  disposed  to  write  narra- 
tives of  those  events,  of  whicn  we  have  full  assur- 

2  ance,  (2)  as  they  delivered  them  to  us,  who  from 
the  first  were  eye-witnesses  and  ministers  of  the 

8  word;  (3^  it  seemed  proper  for  me  also,  as  I  had 
examinea  them  all  accurately,  to  write  out  the 
whole,  methodically,  for  thee,  excellent*  Theoph* 

4  ilus :  (4)  that  thou  mayest  know  the  truth  of  the 
statements,  *»  which  thou  hast  been  taught 

6  In  the  days  of  Herod  the  king  of  Judaea,  there 
was  a  certain  priest,  whose  name  was  Zachariah,® 
of  the  ministration^  of  the  house  of  Abijah ;«  and 
his  wife  was  of  the  daughters  of  Aaron,  and  her 

6  name  was  Elisabeth.^  (6)  And  they  were  both 
upright  before  God,  and  walked  in  all  his  com- 
mandments, and  in  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord, 

7  without  reproach.  (7^  But  they  had  no  child,  be- 
cause Elisabeth  was  Darren :  and  they  were  both 

8  advanced  in  lifcfir — (8)  And  it  occurred,  that  as  he 

Eerformed  the  priestly  functions'^  in  the  order  of 
is  ministration  before  the  Lord,  (9)  according  to 
the  usage  of  the  priesthood,  it  fell  to  him  to  offer 


•Sy.  1»>  i^l 
''  Sy.  v>ords, 

•  Sy.  V.P1 

*Sy. 

•  Sy.  ViloI 

f  Sy.  many  in 
their  days, 

^  Sy.  acted 
priaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


100 


iSy.  ^j.j,jQ^ 


:.k.U'- 


^  Sy.  in  her 
days, 

Sy. 


«n  Sy.  nodded  to 
to  nod. 


LUKE,   L 

the  incense.    And  lie  went  into  the  temple  of  the 
Lord,  (10)  and  the  whole  multitude  of  the  people  10 
were  praying  without,  at  the  time  of  incense. 
n.1)    And  the  angel  of   the  Lord  appeared  to  11 
Zachariah,  standing  on  the  right  side  of  the  altar 
of  incense.    (12)  And  when  Zachariah  saw  him,  12 
he  was  agitated,  and  fear  fell  upon  him.    (18^  And  IS 
the  angel'  said  to  him :  Fear  not,  Zacharian ;  for 
thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  thy  wife  Elisabeth  will 
bear  thee  a  son,  and  thou  shaft  call  his  name  John.* 
(14)  And  thou  wilt  have  joy  and  gladness:  and  14 
many  will  rejoice  at  his  birth.     (15)  E'er  he  will  be  15 
great  before  the  Lord ;  and  he  will  not  drink  wine 
nor  strong  drink,  and  will  be  filled  with  the  Holy 
Spirit  even  from  his  mother's  womb.    (16)  And  16 
many  of  the  children  of  Israel  will  he  convert  to 
the  Lord  their  God.    (17)  And  he  will  go  before  17 
him,  in  the  spirit  and  power  of  Elijah  the  prophet, 
and  will  turn  the  heart  of  the  mthers  unto  the 
children,  and  them  that  are  disobedient  to  the 
knowledge  of  the  righteous,  and  will  prepare  a 
perfect  people  for  the  Lord.    (18)  And  Zachariah  18 
said  to  the  angel :  How  shall  I  know  this  ?    For  I 
am  old,  and  my  wife  is  advanced  in  life.^  (19)  The  19 
angel  answered,  and  said  to  him:  I  am  Gaoriel,^ 
who  stand  before  God;  and  I  am  sent  to  converse 
with  thee,  and  to  tell  thee  these  things.  (20)  Hence-  20 
forth  thou  wilt  be  dumb,  and  unable  to  speak,  im- 
til  the  day  when  these  things  take  place :  because 
thou  believedst  not  my  words,  which  will  be  fill- 
filled  in  their  time. — (21)  And  the  people  were  21 
standing  and  waiting  for  Zachariah;   and  they 
wondered  at  his  tarrying  so  long  in  the  temple. 

(22)  And  when  Zachariah  came  forth,  he  could  22 
not  speak  with  them:  and  they  understood  that 

he  had  seen  a  vision  in  the  temple :  and  he  made 
many  signs"*  to  them,  and  remained  sj>eechless. 

(23)  And  when  the  days  of  his  ministration  were  28 
accomplished,  he  came  to  his  house. — (24)  And  it  24 
was  after  those  days,  that  Elisabeth  his  wife  con- 
ceived.    And  she  secluded  herself  five  months: 
and  she  said:   (25)  These  things  hath  the  Lord  26 
done  for  me,  in  the  days  when  he  looked  upon  me 

to  take  awav  my  reproach  among  men. 

And  in  the  sixth  month,  the  angel  Gabriel  was  26 
sent  by  God  into  Ghdilee,  to  a  city  named  Naza- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   t 

27  reth,"  (27)  to  a  virgin  esDOused  to  a  man  whose 
name  was  Joseph, <>  of  the  nouse  of  David;  and  the 

28  virgin's  name  was  Marjr.p  (28)  And  the  angel 
entered  the  house,  and  said  to  her:  Peace  to  thee, 
thou  full  of  grace  I     The  Lord  is  with  thee :  ana 

29  blessed  art  thou  among  women.  (29)  And  when 
she  saw  [him],  she  was  agitated  by  his  speech; 
and  she  pondered,  what  this  salutation  could  mean. 

80  (80)  And  the  angel  said  to  her :  Fear  not,  Marv ; 

81  for  thou  hast  found  favor  with  God.  (81)  For  lo, 
thou  wilt  conceive  in  thy  womb,  and  wilt  bear  a 

32  son,  and  wilt  call  his  name  Jesus.>^  (82)  He  will 
be  great,  and  will  be  called  the  Son  of  the  Most 
High,  and  the  Lord  God  will  give  him  the  throne 

88  of  his  father  David.  (88)  And  he  will  reign  over 
the  house  of  Jacob  for  ever;  and  of  his  reign  there 

84  will  be  no  end.  (84)  And  Mary  said  to  the  angel: 
How  can  this  be,  as  I  have  not  knowu  a  man? 

85  (85)  The  angel  replied,  and  said  to  her :  The  Holv 
Spirit  will  come,  and  the  power  of  the  Most  High 
will  overshadow  thee;  therefore  he  that  is  bom 
of  thee  is  holy,  and  will  be  called  the  Son  of  God. 

86  (86)  And  lo,  Elisabeth  thy  kinswoman,  even  she 
too  hath  conceived  a  son  in  her  old  age ;  and  this 
is  the  sixth  month  with  her  who  is  called  bar- 

87  ren.     (37)  Because  nothing  is  difficult  for  God. 

88  (88)  Mary  said:  Behold,  I  am  the  handmaid  of 
the  Lord;  be  it  to  me,  according  to  thy  word. 
And  the  angel  departed  from  her. 

39  And  Mary  arose  in  those  days,  and  went  hastily 
to  the  mountain  [district],  to  a  city  of  Judsea: 

40  (40)  and  entered  the  house  of  Zachariah,   and 

41  saluted  Elisabetii.  (41)  And  it  was  so,  that  when 
Elisabeth  heard  the  salutation  of  Mary,  the  child 
leaped  in  her  womb,  and  she  was  filled  with  the 

42  Holy  Spirit  (42)  And  she  cried  out  with  a  loud 
voice,  and  said  to  Mary :  Blessed  art  thou  among 
women;   and  blessed  is  the  fruit  of  thy  womb. 

48  (48)  And  whence  is  this  to  me.  that  the  mother 

44  of  my  Lord  should  come  to  mer  (44)  For  lo,  as 
the  voice  of  thy  salutation  fell  upon  my  ears,  with 

45  great  joy  the  child  leaped  in  my  womb.  (45)  And 
hapDv  IS  she  that  believed;  lor  there  will  be  a 
fumlmient  of  those  things  that  were  told  her  by 

46  the  Lord.— {46)  And  Mary  said:  My  soul  doth 

47  magnify  the  Lord:  (47)  and  my  spirit  rejoioeth  in 


101 
r  Sy.  ^OiiSD 


By. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


102 

*  Sy.  give. 


Sy.  children 
<f  her  Jdndred, 


or,  toot. 


LUKE,   I. 

God  the  author- .of  mv  life.    (48)  For  he  hath  48 
looked  upon  the  humole  condition  of  his  hand- 
maid ;  and  lo,  henceforth  all  generations  will  ascribe* 
blessedness  to  me.     (49)  And  He  that  is  mightj.49 
hath  dohe  for  me  great  things;  and  holy  is  his 
name.     (50)  And  ms  mercy  is  on  them  that  fear  50 
him,  for  generations  and  posterities.     (51)  He  hath  51 
wrought  victory  with  his  arm;  and  hath  scattered 
the  proud  in  the  imagination  of  their  heart    (52)  He  52 
hath  cast  down  the  mighty  from  their  thrones,  and 
hath  exalted  the  lowly.     (53)  The  hungry  hath  he  53 
satisfied  with  good  things,  and  the  rich  hath  he 
sent  away  empty.     (54)  He  hath  aided  Israel  his  54 
servant,  and  remembered  his  merqy,  (55)  (as  he  55 
spoke  with  the  fathers,)  with  Abraham  and  his 
seed,   for  ever. — (56)  And  Mary  remained  with  56 
Elisabeth  about  three  months,  and  returned  to  her 
home. 

And  Elisabeth's  time  of  bringing  forth  arrived;  57 
and  she  bore  a  son.     (58)  And  her  neighbors  and  58 
relatives^  heard  that  the  Lord  had  magnified  his 
mercy  to  her,  and  they  rejoiced  with  her.    (59)  And  59 
it  occurred,  that  on  the  eighth  day  the}^  came  to 
circumcise  the  child.     And  they  called  him  by  the 
name  of  his  father,   Zachariah.      (60)  And  his  60 
mother  answered  and  said:   Not  so;   but  John, 
shall  he  be  called.     (61^  And  they  said  to  her:  61 
There  is  no  one  among  tny  kindred  called  by  that 
name.    (62)  And  they  maae  signs  to  his  father,  how  62 
he  would  have  him  named.   (63)  And  he  asked  for  63 
a  tablet,  and  wrote,  and  said:  John  is  his  name. 
And  every  one  was  surprised.    (64)  And  imme-  64 
diately  his  mouth  was  opened,  and  his  tongue; 
and  he  spoke,  and  praised  God.     (65)  And  fear  65 
came^  upon  all  their  neighbors ;  and  these  things 
were  talked  of  in  all  the  mountain  [district]  of 
Judaea.    (66)  And  all  who  heard,  pondered  them  66 
in  their  heart,  and  said :  What  will  this  child  be? 
And  the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  him. — (67)  And  67 
Zachariah  his  father  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit, 
and  prophesied,  and  said:  (68)  Blessed  be  thelx)rd  68 
God  of  Israel,  who  hath  visited  his  people,  and 
wrought  redemption  for  them:    (69)  And  hath  69 
raised  up  a  horn  of  redemption  for  us,  in  the  house 
of  David  his  servant:  (70)  as  he  spake  by  the  70 
mouth  of  his  holy  prophets,  who  were  of  old, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   IL 

71  (7D  that  he  would  redeem  us  from  our  enemies. 

72  and  from  the  hand  of  all  that  hate  us.  (72)  And 
he  hath  exercised  his  mercy  to  our  &thers,  and 

73  hath  remembered  his  holy  covenants,*  (78)  and 
the  oath  that  he  sware  to  Abntham  our  father,  that 

74  he  would  grant  to  us,  (74)  to  be  redeemed  from 
the  hand  of  our  enemies;  and  that  we  should  wor- 

75  ship  before  him,  without  fear,  (75)  all  our  days,  in 

76  rectitude  and  uprightness.  (76)  And  thou,  child, 
wilt  be  called  a  prophet  of  the  Most  High ;  for 
thou  wilt  go  before  the  fisice  of  the  Lord,  to  pre- 

77  pare  his  way,  (77)  that  he  may  give  the  knowl^ge 
of  lifey  to  his  people,  and  forgiveness  of  their  sins, 

78  (78)  through  the  compassion  of  the  mercy  of  our 
God;  whereby  the  day-spring  from  on  mgh  will 

79  visit  us,  (79)  to  give  light  to  them  that  sit  in  dark- 
ness, and  in  the  shadow  of  death;  and  to  guide 

80  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace.— -(80)  And  the 
child  grew,  and  was  strengthened  in  spirit.*  And 
he  was  in  the  wilderness,  until  the  day  of  his 
manifestation  to  IsraeL 

IL  And  in  those  days  it  occurred,  that  a  decree 
went  forth  from  Augustus  Caesar,  that  all  the 

2  people  of  his  dominion  should  be  enrolled.  (2) 
And  this  enrollment  was  first  made  under  tne 

S  presidency*  of  Quirinus  in  Syria.    (8)  And  every 

4  one  went  to  his  own  city  to  be  enrolled.  (4)  And 
Joseph  also  went  up  from  Nazareth  of  Gtiulee  to 
Judaea,  to  the  city  of  David  which  is  called  Bethle- 
hem, because  he  was  of  the  house  and  lineage  of 

5  David,  (5)  with  Mary  his  espoused,  then  pregnant, 

6  to  be  enrolled.  (6)  And  it  was  while  tney  were 
there,*  that  the  days  for  her  to  bring  forth  were 

7  completed.  (7)  And  she  brought  forth  her  first- 
born son,^  and  wrapped  him  in  bandages,  and  laid 
him  in  the  stall;  for  they  had  no  place  where 
they  could  lodge. 

8  And  there  were  shepherds  in  that  region,  who 
abode  there  and  kept  watch  of  their  fiocks  by 

9  night.  (9)  And  lo,  the  angel  of  God  came  to  them, 
and  the  glory  of  the  Lord  shone  upon  them :  and 

10  they  feared  with  great  fear.  (10)  And  the  angel 
said  to  them:  Fear  not;  for,  behold  I  announce 
to  you  great  joy,  which  will  be  to  all  the  world.^ 

11  (11)  For  there  is  born  to  you  this  day  a  deliverer,© 


108 


»  Sy. 


S/.IaL 


or,  1 


Sy. 
«aXlJL»$GLO} 


°  Sy.  "toojja 


Digitized  by 


Google 


104 


LUKE,   IL 


t^  t\ 


«  Sy.  word. 


Sy.  word. 


K  Sy,  words. 


Sy.  give. 


'  Sy.  ^aUiaas 


who  is  the  Lord  Messiah,  in  the  dtj  of  David. 
(12)  And  this  is  the  sign  for  you:   xe  will  find  12 
the  babe  wrapped  in  bandages,  and  placed  in  a 
staJL     (13)  And  instantly  there  were  seen  with  18 
the  angel,  the  many  hosts  of  heaven,  praising  God, 
and  saying:   (14)   Glory  to  God  in  the  highest  14 
[heavens],  and  on  earth  peace^  and.good  hope  for 
men. — (15)  And  it  was  so,  that  when  the  angels  15 
had  gone  from  them  into  heaven,  the  shepherds  con- 
ferred with  one  another,  and  said :  Let  us  go  down 
to  Bethlehem,  and  see  this  things   which  hath 
occurred,  as  the  Lord  hath  made  known  to  us. 
16)  And  thev  came  hastily,  and  found  Mary  and  16 
toseph,  and  the  babe  laid  in  the  stall.     (17)  And  17 
when  they  saw,  they  made  known  the  information^ 
which  was  given  to  them  concerning  the  child. 
(18)  And  all  that  heard,  wondered  at  the  things  18 
that  were  told  them  by  the  shepherds.     (19J  And  19 
Mary  laid  up  all  these  things, »  and  pondered  them 
in  her  heart.     (20)  And  the  shepherds  returned,  20 
glorifying  and  praising  God  for  all  that  they  had 
seen  and  heard,  as  it  was  told  them. 

And  when  the  eight  days  for  the  circumcision  21 
of  the  child  were  completed,  his  name  was  caUed 
Jesus  ;  as  he  was  named  by  the  angel,  before  he 
was  conceived  in  the  womb. 

And  when  the  days  of  their  purification  were  22 
completed,  according  to  the  law  of  Moses,  they 
carried  him  to  Jerusalem,  to  present  him  before 
the  Lord :  (28)  (as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of  the  23 
Lord,  that  every  male  opening  the  womb  shall  be 
called  holy  to  the  Lord:)   (24)   and  to  offer^  a  24 
sacrifice,  according  as  it  is  written  in  the  law  of 
the  Lord,  A  pair  of  turtle-doves,  or  two  young 

Jigeons.     (25)   And  there  was  a  certain  man  in  25 
erusalem,  whose  name  was  Simeon.»     This  man 
was  upright  and  just,  and  was  waiting  for  the  con- 
solation of  Israel,  and  the  Holy  Spirit  was  upon 
him.    (26)  And  it  had  been  told  him  bv  the  Holy  26 
Spirit,  that  he  would  not  see  death,  until  he  should 
see  the  Messiah  of  the  Lord.    (27)  This  man  came,  27 
by  the  Spirit,  into  the  temple;    and  when  his 
parents  brought  in  the  child  Jesus,  to  do  for  him 
as  is  commanded  in  the  law,   (28)  he  took  him  in  28 
his  arms,  and  blessed  God,  and  said:   (29)   My  29 
Lord,  now  release  thou  thy  servant  in  peace ,  as 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   11. 


106 


84 


36 


30  thou  hast  said :  (80)  for  lo,  my  eyes  have  seen  thy 

81  mercy,  (31)  which  thou  hast  prepared  in  the  pres- 

82  ence  of  all  nations,  (32)  a  light  for  a  revelation  to 
the  Gentiles,  and  a  glory  for  thy  people  Israel. — 

S3  (33)  And  Joseph  and  his  mother  were  astonished 
at  those  things  which  were  spoken  concerning  him. 
(34)  And  Simeon  blessed  tnem,  and  said  to  Mary 
his  mother :  Behold,  this  [child]  is  set  forth  fer 
the  fall  and  for  the  rising  of  many  in  Israeli  and 
for  a  standard*'  of  contention;  (35)  (and  also  a  daxt 
will  pierce  thy  own  soul) ;  that  the  thoughts  of  the 

86  hearts  of  many  may  be  disclosed. — (36)  And  Han- 
na,^  a  prophetess,  the  daughter  of  Phanuel,  of  the 
tribe  of  Asher, — she  also  was  aged  in  days,  and, 
from  her  maidenhood,  had  lived  seven  years  with 

87  her  husband,  (37)  and  was  a  widow  of  about 
eightv  and  four  years,  and  departed  not  from  the 
temple,  but  worshipped  by  day  and  by  night,  with 

88  fasting  and  prayer ;— (38)  and  she  too  stood  up,  in 
that  hour,  and  gave  thanks  to  the  Lord,  and  spoke 
of  him  to  every  one  that  waited  for  the  redemption 

H9'  of  Jerusalem.— (39)  And  when  they  had  accom- 
plished all  things,  according  to  the  law  of  the  Lord, 
they  returned  to  Galilee,  to  their  city  Nazareth. 
(40)  And  the  child  grew,  and  was  strengthened  in 
spirit,™  and  was  filled  with  wisdom ;  ana  the  grace 
of  Gbd  was  upon  him. 

And  his  people  went  up  to  Jerusalem  every 

42  vear,  at  the  feast  of  the  passover.  (42)  And  when 
he  was  twelve  years  old,  they  went  up  to  the  feast, 

43  as  they  were  accustomed.  (43)  And  when  the 
days  were  completed,  they  returned :  but  the  child 
Jesus  remained  at  Jerusalem,  and  Joseph  and  his 

44  mother  knew  not  [of  it] ;  (44)  for  they  supposed 
he  was  with  his  companions."  And  when  they  had 
travelled  a  day's  journey,  they  sought  him  among 
their  people,  and  [inquired]  of  every  one  that 
knew  them.  (45)  And  they  did  not  find  him. 
And  they  returned  again  to  Jerusalem,  searching  for 
him.  (46)  And  after  three  days,  thev  found  him 
in  the  temple,  sitting  in  the  midst  of  the  teachers,** 
and  listening  to  them,  and  asking  them  questions. 
(47J  And  all  they  that  heard  him,  were  astonished 
at  nis  wisdom  and  his  answers.  (48)  And  when 
they  saw  him  they  were  amazed.  And  his  mother 
saicl  to  liim :  My  son,  why  hast  thou  done  so  to  us? 


40 


41 


45 
46 


47 
48 


Sy.  lZ]lo 


'or, 


Sy.  sons  of 
the  company. 


«y    ]l  €k\s£ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


106 


LUKE,   IIL 


«Sy.Vi5a4*l 

-  Sy.  'UodU 

•  Sy. 

ff  Sy  ]<7^>r\ 

•»  Sy.  lAoOaZ 

*  Sy.  M7orcfe. 


^  Sy.  U^Ki, 

Gr.  TO  tfwr^piov. 


For  lo,  I  and  thy  father  have  been  seeking  for 
thee  with  great  anxiety.    (49)  He  said  to  them :  49 
Why  did  ye  seek  me  ?    Do  ye  not  know,  that  it 
behooveth  me  to  be  in  my  Father's  house?   (50)  But  50 
they  did  not  comprehend  the  word  that  he  spoke 
to  them.     (51)  And  he  went  down  with  them,  and  51 
came  to  Nazareth,  and  was  obedient  to  ^ihem.   And 
hi»  mother  laid  up  all  these  things  in  her  heart 
(52^  And  Jesus  increased  in  stature,  and  in  wisdom,  52 
ana  in  grace,  before  God  and  men. 

And  in  the  fifteenth  year  of  the  reign  of  Tiberius  III 
Caesar,  in  the  presidency^   of  Pontius  Pilate  in 
Judaea,  while  Herod  was  Tetrarch^  in  Ghlilee,  and 
Philip  his  brother  Tetrarch  in  Ituraea®  and  in  the 
region  of  Trachonitis,^  and  Lysanias  Tetrarch  of 
Abilene,®  (2)  in  the  high  priesthood  of  Annas^  and    2 
of  Caiaphas ;«  the  word  of  God  was  upon  John  the 
son  of  Zachariah,  in  the  wilderness.    (8)  And  he    3 
came  into  all  the  region  about  the  Jordan,  pro- 
claiming the  baptism  of  repentance^  for  the  for- 
giveness of  sins.     (4)  As  it  is  written  in  the  book    4 
of  the  discourses'  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  who  said: 
The  voice  of  one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Prepare 
ye  the  way  of  the  Lord ;  and  make  straight  paths 
in  the  plain  for  our  God.    (5)  All  valleys  shall  be    6 
filled  up,  and  all  mountains  and  hills  be  lowered; 
and  the  hillock  shall  be  levelled  down,  and  the 
rough  place  become  smooth.     (6)   And  all  flesh    6 
shall  see  the  life^  which  is  of  God.— (7)  And  he    7 
said  to  the  multitudes,  who  came  to  him  to  be 
baptized:    Ye    progeny  of  vipers,  who  hath  in- 
structed you  to  flee  from  the  future  wrath?   (8)     8 
Bring  forth,  therefore,  fruits  comporting  with  re- 
pentance.    And  begin  not  to  say  in  yourselves: 
we  have  Abraham  for  our  father;  for  I  say  to 
you,  that  God  can,  from  these  stones,  raise  up  sons 
to  Abraham.    (9)  And  lo,  the  ax  is  put  to  the    9 
root  of  trees.     Every  tree  therefore  that  beareth 
not  good  fruits,  is  hewed  down,  and  falleth  into 
the  fire, — (10)  And  the  multitudes  asked  him,  and  10 
said:  What,then,  shall  we  do?   (11)  He  answered,  11 
and  said  to  them :  Whoever  hath  two  tunics,  let 
him  give  [one]  to  him  that  hath  none ;  and  who- 
ever nath  food,  let  him  do  the  same.    (12)  And  12 
publicans  also  came  to  be  baptized.   And  they  said 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,    IIL 


107 


Sy. 


13  to  him:  Teacher,^  what  shall  we  do?  (13)  And 
he  said  to  them :  Exact  no  more  than  ye  are  re* 

14  quired  to  exact.  (14)  And  those  serving  in  war 
inquired  of  him,  and  said :  And  what  shdl  we  do  ? 
He  said  to  them:  Be  insolent  to  no  one,  and 
oppress  no  one,  and  let  your  pay  satisfy  you. — 

15  (15)  And  while  the  people  were  thinking  of  John, 
and  all  pondered  in  their  heart,  whether  he  were 

16  the  Messiah;  (16)  John  answered  and  said  to 
them:  Behold,  I  baptize  jrou  with  water;  but 
after  me  cometh  one  mightier  than  I,  the  strings 
of  whose  shoes  I  am  not  worthy  to  untie ;  he  will 
baptize"*  you  with  the  Holy  ^irit  and  with  fire. 

17  (17)  He  holdeth  his  winnowmg  shovel  in  his  hand, 
and  he  will  make  clean  his  mreshing  floor ;  and 
the  wheat  he  gathereth  into  his  gamers,  and  the 
chaff  he   will  burn   with  fire  not  extinguished. 

18  (18)  And  many  other  things  also,  he  taught  and 

19  proclaimed  to  the  people. — (19)  But  Herod  the 
Tetrarch,  because  he  was  reproved  by  John,  on 
account  of  Herodias  the  wife  of  his  brother  Philip, 
and  on  account  of  all  the  evil  things  he  had  done, 

20  (20)  added  this  also  to  them  all,  m^t^  he  shut  up  •  Sy.  and 
John  in  prison. 

21  And  it  occurred,  when  all  the  people  were  bap- 
tized, that  Jesus  also  was  baptized.     And  as  he 

22  prayed,  the  heavens  were  opened ;  (22J  and  the 
Holy  Spirit  descended  upon  him,  in  tne  bodily 
likeness  of  a  dove:  and  there  was  a  voice  firom 
heaven,  which  said :  Thou  art  my  beloved  Son,  in 
whom  I  have  delight 

23  And  Jesus  was  about  thirty  years  old.  And  he 
was  accounted  the  son  of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Heli, 

24  (24)  the  son  of  Matthat,  the  son  of  Levi,  the  son 
of  Melchi,  the  son  of  Janna,  the  son  of  Joseph, 

25  (25)  the  son  of  Mattathias,  the  son  of  Amos,  the  son 
of  Nahum,  the  son  of  Esli,  the  son  of  Naggai, 

26  (26)  the  son  of  Maath,  the  son  of  Mattathias,  the 
son  of  Shimei,  the  son  of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Judah, 

27  (27)  the  son  of  Joanna,  the  son  of  Ehesa,  the  son 
of  Zorubbabel,  the  son  of  Salathiel,  the  son  of 

28  Neri,  (28)  the  son  of  Melchi,  the  son  of  Addi,  the 
son  of  Cosam,  the  son  of  Elmodam,  the  son  of  Er, 

29  (29)  the  son  of  Joses,  the  son  of  Eliezer,  the  son 
of  Joram;  the  son  of  Matthat,  the  son  of  Levi, 

80  (80)  the  son  of  Simeon,  the  son  of  Judah,  the  son 


Sy.  ll^liiO 


Digitized  by 


Google 


108 


LUKE,   IV. 


of  Joseph,  the  son  of  Jonam,  the  son  of  Eliakim, 
(81J  the  son  of  Melcah,  the  son  of  Hainan,  the  son  31 
of  Mattatha,  the  son  of  Nathan,  the  son  of  David, 
(82)  the  son  of  Jesse,  the  son  of  Obed,  the  son  of  82 
Boaz,  the  son  of  Salmon,  the  son  of  Nahshon, 

(33)  the  son  of  Amminadab,  the  son  of  Ram,  the  38 
son  of  Hezron,  the  son  of  Pharez,  the  son  of  Judah, 

(34)  the  son  of  Jacob,  the  son  of  Isaac,  the  son  of  34 
Abraham,  the  son  of  Terah,  the  son  of  Nahor, 

(35)  the  son  of  Serug,  the  son  of  Ecu,  the  son  of  35 
Peleg,  the  son  of  Eber,  the  son  of  Salah,  (36)  the  36 
son  of  Cainan,  the  son  of  Arphaxad,  the  son  of 
Shem,  the  son  of  Noah,  the  son  of  Lamech,  (87)  87 
the  son  of  Methuselah,  the  son  of  Enoch,  the  son 

of  Jared,  the  son  of  Mehalaleel,  the  son  of  Cainan, 
(38)  the  son  of  Enos,  the  son  of  Seth,  the  son  of  88 
Adam,  the  son  of  God. 

And  Jesus,  being  full  of  the  Holjr  Spirit,  re- IV. 
turned  from  the  Jordan.     And  the  Spirit  led  him 
into  the  wilderness,  (2)  forty  days,  to  be  tempted    2 
by  the  Calumniator.*     And  durmg  those  days,  he 
ate  nothing;  and  when  he  had  completed  them, 
he  was  at  last  hungry.    (3)  And  the  Calumniator    8 
said  to  him:  K  thou  art  the  Son  of  God,  command 
this  stone  to  become  bread.     (4)  Jesus  replied,  and    4 
said  to  him:  It  is  written.  Not  by  bread  only, 
doth  man  live;    but  by  every   thing^   of  God. 
(5)  And  Satanc  conducted  him  to  a  high  mountain,     5 
and  showed  him  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  land,^  in 
a  little  time.     (6)  And  the  Calumniator  said  to    6 
him:  To  thee  will  I  give  all  this  dominion,  and 
the  glory  of  it,  which  is  committed  to  me,  and  to 
whom  I  please,  I  give  it:   (7^  if  therefore  thou    7 
wilt  worsnip  before  me,  the  wnole  shall  be  thine. 
(8)  But  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  him :  It  is  written,     8 
Thou  shalt  worship  the  Lord  thy  God,  and  him 
only  shalt  thou  serve.     (9)  And  he  brought  him    9 
to  Jerusalem,  and  set  him  on  a  pinnacle  of  the 
temple,  and  said  to  him :  If  thou  art  the  Son  of 
God,  cast  thyself  down  hence :  (10)  for  it  is  written,  10 
He  will  give  his  angels  charge  over  thee,  to  keep 
thee :  (11)  and  in  their  arms  will  they  sustain  thee.  11 
lest  thou  strike  thy  foot  against  a  stone.    (12)  Ana  12 
Jesus  replied  and  said  to  him:  It  is  said.  Thou 
shalt  not  tempt  the  Lord  thy  God. — (18)  And  when  18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   IV. 


109 


•Sy.  ]la»i.r 


the  Calumniator  had  finished  all  his  temptations, 
he  departed  fix>m  him  for  a  time. 

14  And  Jesus  returned,  in  the  power®  of  the  Spirit, 
to  Gttlilee ;  and  fame  concerning  him  spread  in  all 

15  the  region  around  them.  (15)  And  he  taught  in 
their  synagogues,  and  was  lauded  by  every  one. — 

16  (16)  And  he  came  to  Nazareth,  where  he  had  been 
brought  up :  and  he  went,  as  he  was  accustomed, 
into  the  synagogue  on  the  sabbath  day,  and  rose 

17  up  to  read  (17l  And  there  was  delivered  to  him 
the.bodc  of  Isaian  the  prophet.  And  Jesus  opened 
the  book,  and  found  tne  place  where  it  is  written : 

18  (18)  The  Spirit  of  the  Lorn  is  upon  me;  and  there- 
lore  he  hath  anointed  me  to  proclaim  tiding  to 
the  poor;  and  hath  sent  me  to  nesl  the  contnte  in 
heart,  and  to  proclaim  release*  to  the  captives,  and 
sight  to  the  blind ;  and  to  send  away  the  contrite 

19  with  forgiveness  [of  their  sins] ;  (19)  and  to  pro- 

20  claim  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord.    (20)  And  t  gy. 
he  rolled  up  the  book,  and  gave  it  to  the  servitor,^   ]i  ^vn^^ 
and  went  and  sat  down.     And  the  eyes  of  all  in 

21  the  synagogue  were  gazing  upon  him.  (21)  And 
he  began  to  say  to  tnem :  This  day,  is  this  scrip- 

22  ture  which  ye  We  heard,  fulfilled.  (22)  And  all 
bare  him  witness,  and  admired  the  gracious  words 
which  proceeded  from  his  mouth;  and  they  said:  Is 

23  not  this  the  son  of  Joseph  ?  (23)  Jesus  said  to  them  : 
Perhaps,  ye  will  speak  to  me  this  proverb,  Physician, 
heal  thyself:  ana  whatever  we  nave  heard  of  thy 
doing  in  Capernaum,  do  thou  here  also  in  thy  city. 

24  (24)  And  he  said  to  them :  Verily  I  say  to  you, 
There  is  no  prophet  who  is  acceptable  in  his  own 

26  city.  (25)  And  I  tell  you  the  truth,  that  there 
were  manj^  widows  in  tne  house  of  Israel,  in  the 
days  of  Elijah  the  prophet  when  the  heavens  were 
closed  up  three  years  and  six  months,  and  there 

26  was  a  great  famine  in  all  the  land :  (26)  but  to  no 
one  of  them  was  Elijah  sent,  except  to  Sarepta^ 

27  of  Sidon,  unto  a  widow  woman.  (27)  And  there 
were  many  leprous  in  the  house  of  Israel,  in  the 
days  of  Elisha  the  prophet:  but  none  of  them  was 

28  cleansed,  except  Naaman  the  Syrian.** — (28)  And 
when  they  heard  these  things,  those  in  the  syna- 

29  gogue  were  dl  filled  with  wrath.  (29)  And  they 
rose  up,  and  thrust  him  out  of  the  city,  and 
brought  him  to  the  top  of  the  hill  on  which  the 


k  Sy.  USdM 


Digitized  by 


Google 


110 


LUKE,   V. 


^  ar*  doctrine. 


"8y.]LL*^ 


*9f,greaL 


city  was  built,  that  they  might  cast  him  down  from 
the  rock.    (30)  But  he  passed  through  the  midst  80 
of  them,  and  went  away. 

And  he  went  down  to  Capernaum,  a  city  of  31 
Gtelilee;  and  taught  them  on  sabbath  days,    (32)  32 
And  they  were  astonished  at  his  teaching, » for  his 
word  was  authoritative.^    (33)  And  there  was  in  33 
the  synagogue  a  man,  in  whom  was  an  unclean 
demon  :J  and  he  cried  out,  with   a  loud  voice, 
(34J  and  said :  Let  me  alone :  What  have  I  to  do  34 
witn  thee,  Jesus,  thou  Nazarean?"*     Hast  thou 
come  to  destroy  us?    I  know  thee,  who  thou  art, 
the  Holy  One  of  God.    (35)  And  Jesus  rebuked.  35 
him,  ana  said :  Shut  thy  mouth ;  and  come  out  of 
him.      And  the  demon  threw  him  down  in  the 
midst,  and  came  out  of  him,  having  not  harmed 
him  at  all.     (36)  And  wonder  seizSi  every  one ;  86 
and  they  talked  together,  and  said :  What  a  word  is 
this !    For,  with  authority  and  efficiency, »  he  com- 
mandeth  the  unclean  spirits,  and  they  come  out. 
(37)  And  his  fame  went  out  into  all  the  surround-  87 
ing  region. 

And  when  Jesus  went  out  of  the  synagogue,  he  88 
entered  the  house  of  Simon.     And  the  momer-in- 
law  of  Simon  was  afflicted  with  a  severe®  fever: 
and  they  besought  him  in  her  behalf.    (39)  And  89 
he  stood  over  her,  and  rebuked  the  fever ;  and  it 
left  her.     And  immediately  she  arose  and  min- 
istered to  them. — (40)  And  when  the  sun  was  set,  40 
all  those  that  had  sick  persons,  afflicted  with  divers 
diseases,  brought  them  to  him;   and  he  laid  his 
hand  on  every  one  of  them,  and  healed  them. 
(41^  And  demons  went  out  of  many,  crying  out  41 
ana  saying:  Thou  art  the  Messiah,  the  Son  of  God. 
And  he  rebuked  them,  and  suffered  them  not  to 
say,  that  they  knew  him  to  be  Messiah. — (42)  And  42 
at  the  dawn  of  day,  he  went  out  and  retired  to  a 
desert    place.     And  the  multitudes  sought  him, 
and  went  out  to  him,  and  held  him  fast,  that  he 
might  not  retire  from  them.    (43)  Aiid  Jesus  said  43 
to  them :  It  behooveth  me  to  announce  the  king- 
dom of  God  to  other  cities  also ;  for  therefore  was 
I  sent.     (44)  And  he  preached  in  the  synagogues  44 
of  Galilee. 

And  it  occurred,  that  a  multitude  gathered  about  V. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


•  Gr.  Simom. 


^  Sy.  ObO) 
•  or,  word. 


LUKE,    V.  Ill 

him,  to  hear  the  word  of  GocL    And  he  was  stand- 

2  ing  bj  the  side  of  the  sea  of  Gennesaret,  (2)  and 

*       he  saw  two  ships  standing  near  the  sea,  and  the 

fishermen  were  gone  out  of  them,  and  were  wash- 

S  ing  their  nets.    (8)  And  one  of  them  belonged  to 

Simon  Cephas:*  and  Jesus  entered  and  sat  in  it 

And  he  told  them  to  draw  oflf  a  little  from  the 

shore,  into  the  sea :  and  he  seated  himselJ^  and  taught 

4  the  multitude  from  the  ship. — (4)  And  when  he 
ceased  from  speaking,  he  said  to  Simon :  Launch 
out  into  the  deep,  and  cast  your  net  for  a  draught. 

5  (5)  Simon  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Eabbi,^  all 
the  night  we  have  toiled,  and  have  caught  nothing: 

6  but,  at  thy  bidding,^  I  will  cast  the  net.  (6)  And 
when  they  had  done  so,  they  inclosed  very  many 

7  fishes,  so  that  the  net  was  rent  (7)  And  they 
made  signs  to  their  associates,  in  the  other  ship,  to 
oome  and  help  them.  And  when  they  came,  they 
filled  both  the  ships,  so  that  they  were  near  to 

8  sinking.  (8)  And  when  Simon  Cephas  saw  [it], 
he  fell  before  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  said  to  him : 
I  beseech  thee,  my  Lord,  that  thou  leave  me,  for  I 

9  am  a  sinfrd  man.  (9)  For  astonishment  had  seized 
him,  and  all  that  were  with  him,  at  the  draught  of 

LO  fishes  which  they  had  caught :  (10)  and  in  like 
manner  also  James  and  John,  the  sons  of  Zebedee, 
who  were  partners  of  Simon.  But  Jesus  said: 
Fear  thou  not;  henceforth  thou  shalt  catch  men 

11  unto  life.d    (11^  And  they  brought  the  vessels  to  *  Sy.  ]r»»^ 
the  land :  ana  tney  left  all  and  followed  hinL 

12  And  when  Jesus  was  in  one  of  the  cities,  a  man 
came  all  frdl  of  leprosy,  and  seeing  Jesus,  he  fell 
upon  his  face,  and  besought  him,  and  said  to  him : 
My  Lord,  if  thou  wilt,  thou  canst  cleanse  me. 

18  (13)  And  Jesus  put  forth  his  hand,  and  touched 
him,  and  said  to  nim :  I  will  [it] ;  be  thou  dean. 
And    immediately  his  leprosy  went  from    him. 

14  (1^  And  he  charged  him:  Speak  to  no  one;  but  go 
ana  show  thyself  to  the  priests,  and  oflFer  the  obla- 
tion for  thy  purification,  as  Moses  hath  conmiandecL 

15  for  a  testimony  to  them. — (15)  And  his  fame  spread 
abroad  still  more:  and  much  peoole  assembled 
to  he^r  him,  and  to  be  cured  of  their  diseases. 

16  (16)  And  he  retired  into  a  desert,  and  prayed. 

17  And  it  occurred,  on  one  of  the  d^s  when  Jesus 
was  teaching,  that  Pharisees  and  Doctors  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


112 


Sf.  ,i4^Sv) 


»^.la?a^ 


k  Sy.  sons. 


LUKE,    V. 

law®  were  sitting  by,  who  had  come  from  all  the 
villages  of  Qtdilee  and  of  Judasa,-  and  Jerusalem : 
and  the  power^  of  the  Lord  was  present  to  heal      • 
them.     (18)  And  some  persons  brought  a  para-  18 
lytic  man,  on  a  couch,  ana  sought  to  bring  him  in, 
and  to  place  him  b^ore  him.     (19)  And  when  19 
they  could  not  thus  introduce  him,  because  of  the 
multitude  of  the  people,  they  ascended  to  the  roo^ 
and  let  him  down  with  the  couch,  from  the  cover- 
ing, into  the  midst,  before  Jesus.    (20)  And  when  20 
Jesus  saw  their  faith,  he  said  to  the  paralytic: 
Man,  thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.     (21)   And  the  21 
Scribes  and  Pharisees  began  to  reason,  and  to  say : 
Who  is  this  that  speaketh  blasphemy  U    Who  can 
forgive  sins,  but  God  only  ?    (22)  And  Jesus  knew  22 
their  thoughts,  and  said  to  them :  What  think  ye 
in  your  heart  ?    (23)  Which  is  the  easier,  to  say,  23 
Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee,  or  to  say.  Arise  and 
walk  ?    (24)  But  that  ye  may  know,  that  the  Son  24 
of  ^man  is  competent  to  forgive  sins  on  the  earth, — 
he  said  to  the  paralytic:  I  say  to  thee.  Arise,  take 
up  thy  couch,  and  go  to  thy  nome.     (25)  And  in-  25 
stantly,  he  rose  up  before  their  eyes,  and  took  up 
his  couch,  and  went  home,  glorifying  God.    (26)  26 
And  astonishment  seized  every  one;    and  they 
praised  God ;  and  they  were  fined  with  awe,  and 
said :  We  have  seen  wonders  to-day. 

And  after  these  things,  Jesus  went  out  and  saw  27 
a  publican,^  named  Levi,»  sitting  among  the  publi- 
cans; and  he  said  to  him:  Come  after  me.    (28)  28 
And  he  left  every  thing,  and  arose,  and  went  after 
him.    (29)  And  Levi  made  a  great  entertainment  29 
for  him  at  his  house ;  and  there  was  a  numerous 
company  of  publicans  and  others  who  reclined  with 
them.    (30)  And  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  mur-  80 
mured,  and  said  to  his  disciples :  Why  do  ye  eat 
and  drink  with  publicans  and  sinners?    (81)  And  31 
Jesus  answered  and  said  to  them :  A  physician  is 
not  sought  after  for  the  well,  but  for  those  very 
sick.    (32)  I  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  82 
sinners,  to  repentance. 

And  they  said  to  him :  Why  do  the  disciples  of  83 
John  fast  often,  and  pray,  and  also  [those]  of  the 
Pharisees;   but  thine  eat  and  drink r    (34)  And  84 
he  said  to  them :   Ye  cannot  make  the  guests^  of 
the  nuptial  chamber  fast,  while  the  bridegroom  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,    VI. 


113 


85  with  them.  (85^  But  the  days  will  come,  when  the 
bridegroom  will  be  taken  up  from  theuL  and  then 

36  will  tnej  fast,  in  those  days.  (86)  Ana  he  spoke 
a  similitude^  to  them :  No  one  teareth  a  patch  from 
a  new  garment,  and  putteth  it  to  an  ola  garment ; 
lest  he  tear  the  new,  and  the  patch  from  the  new 

37  cease  to  make  the  old  [garmenti  whole.  (87)  And 
no  one  putteth  new  wine  into  ola  sacks ;  otherwise, 
the  new  wine  will  burst  the  sacks,  and  the  wine 
will  run  out,  and  the  sacks  be  ruined.  (88)  But 
thej  put  new  wine  into  new  sacks,  and  both  are 
preserved.  (89)  And  no  one  drinketh  old  wine, 
and  immediately  calleth  for  new ;  for  he  saith,  The 
old  is  the  delicious. 


88 


^9 


YI.  And  on  a  sabbath  it  occurred,  as  Jesus  walked 
among  the  tilled  grounds,  that  his  disciples  plucked 

2  ears,  and  rubbed  them  in  their  hands  and  ate.  (2) 
Ana  some  of  the  Pharisees  said  to  them :  Why  do 
ye  that,  which  it  is  not  lawful  to  do  on  the  sabbath  ? 

8  (3)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  them:  Have  ye  not 
read  what  David  did,  when  he  was  hungry,  he  and 

4  those  with  him?  (4)  How  he  entered  into  the 
house  of  God,  and  took  and  ate  the  bread  of  the 
Lord's  table,  and  gave  [it]  to  those  that  were  with 
him;    which  it  was  not  lawful,  except  for  the 

6  priests  onlv,to  eat?  (6)  And  he  saia  to  them: 
The  Son  of  man  is  lord  or  the  sabbath. 

6  And  on  another  sabbath,  he  entered  a  synagogue 
and  taught.    And  a  man  was  there,  whose  right 

7  hand  was  withered.  (7)  And  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  watched  him,  whether  he  would  heal  on 
the  sabbath;   tjiat  they  might  be  able  to  accuse 

8  him.  (8)  And  as  he  luiew  their  thoughts,  he  said 
to  the  man  with  a  withered  hand :  Eise  and  come 
into  the  midst  of  the  congregation.    And  when  he 

9  came  and  stood  [there],  (9)  Jesus  said  to  them :  I 
ask  you.  What  is  it  lawfiil  to  do  on  the  sabbath? 
that  which  is  good  ?  or  that  which  is  evil  ?  to  save 

10  life  ?  or  to  destroy  [it]  ?  (10)  And  he  looked  upon 
them  all;  and  [then]  said  to  him.  Stretch  forth 
thy  hand.    And  he  stretched  out  his  hand,  and  it 

11  was  restored  like  the  other.*  (11)  And  they  were 
filled  with  envy;  and  they  conferred  one  with 
another,  what  they  should  do  to  Jesus. 

12  And  in  those  days,  Jesus  retired  to  a  mountain 


or,jNNwUt 


*  Sy.  itsjelloic 


Digitized  by 


Google 


114 


b  r4y.  ]»»  iNg, 

•»r.  A})ftstle8, 

*=  (Jr.  ilirpog. 
d  Sy. 

«  Sy.  Uxi 
*^  or,  word. 


8v.)].i^ 


LUKE>   VI. 

to  piay ;  and  he  passed  the  night  there,  in  prayer 
to  God.   (13)  And  when  the  day  dawned,  he  caUed  18 
his  disciples,  and  selected  from  them  twelve,  whom 
he  named  Legates:**  (14)  Simon  whom  he  named  14 
Cephas,  <5  and  Andrew  his  brqther,  and  James,  and 
John,   and  Philip,  and  Bartholomew,    (16)   and  15 
Matthew,  and  Thomas,  and  James  the  son  of  Al- 
pheus,d  and  Simon  who  was  called  Zelotes,®  (16)  16 
and  Judas  the  son  of  James,^  and  Judas  Iscariot,fir 
who  became  a  traitor.— (17)  And  Jesus  descended  17 
with  them,  and  stood  in  the  plain;  and  a  great 
company  of  his  disciples,  and  a  multitude  of  assem 
bled  people,  from  all  Judaea,  and  from  Jerusalem, 
and  from  the  sea-shore  of  Tyre  and  Sidon ;  who 
came  to  hear  his  discourse,^  and  to  be  healed  of 
their  diseases ;  (18)  and  they  who  were  afi^cted  by  18 
unclean  spirits :  and  they  were  healed.     (19)  And  19 
the  whole  multitude  sought  to  touch  him ;    for 
there  went  a  virtue^  out  of  him  and  healed  them 
all. 

And  he  lifted  his  eyes  upon  his  disciples,  and  20 
said :  Blessed  are  ye  poor ;  for  the  kingdom  of  God 
is  yours.    (21)  Blessed  are  ye  that  hunger  now ;  21 
for  ye  will  be  satisfied.     Blessed  are  ye  that  weep 
now;  for  ye  will  laugh.     (22)   Blessed  are  ye,  22 
when  men  shall  hate  you,  and  repel  you,  and  re- 
vile you,  and  cast  out  your  names  as  base,  for  the 
Son  of  man's  sake.    (23)  Rejoice  in  that  day  and  28 
exult,  for  your  reward  is  great  in  heaven ;  for  so 
did  their  fathers  to  the  prophets.   (24)  But,  woe  to  24 
you  that  are  rich ;  for  ye  have  received  your  con- 
solation.   (25)  Woe  to  you  that  are  full;  for  ye  25 
will  hunger.    Woe  to  you  that  laugh  now ;  for  ye 
will  weep  and  mourn.    (26)  Woe  to  you,  when  26 
men  shall  speak  your  praise ;  for  so  md  their  fa- 
thers to  the  false  prophets.— (27)  And  to  you  who  27 
hear,  I  say :  Love  your  enemies ;  and  do  favors  to 
them  that  hate  you ;  (28)  and  bless  them  that  curse  28 

{rou ;  and  pray  for  them  that  drag  you  with  vio- 
ence.     (29)   To  him  that  smiteth  thee  on  thv  29 
cheek,  offer  the  other :  and  from  him  that  taketh 
away  thy  cloak,  keep  not  back  thy  tunic.    (30^  To  80 
every  one  that  asketn  of  thee,  give  thou :  and  irom 
him  that  taketh   thy  property,   demand  it  not. 
(81)  And  as  ye  would  that  men  should  do  to  you,  so  81 
tto  ye  also  to  them.    (82)  For,  if  ye  love  them  that  82 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   VL 


116 


love  you,  what  goodtess  is  it  in  you?    For  even 

33  sinners  love  those  that  love  them.  (88)  And  if  ye 
do  good  to  them  that  do  good  to  you,  what  good- 
ness is  it  in  you  ?    For  even  sinners  do  the  same. 

34  (84)  And  if  ye  lend  to  one  from  whom  ye  expect 
recompense,  what  goodness  is  it  in  you?  For 
sinners  also  lend  to  sinners,  to  receive  adequate 

35  recompense.  (35)  But  love  ye  your  enemies,  and 
do  them  good;  and  lend  ye,  and  disappoint  the 
hopes  of  no  one :  and  great  will  be  your  reward, 
and  ye  will  be  children  of  the  Highest ;  for  he  is 

36  kind  to  the  evil,  and  to  the  unthankful.  (36)  Be 
ye  therefore  merciful,  as  also  your  Father  is  merci- 

37  ful.  (87)  Judge  not,  and  ye  will  not  be  judged : 
condemn  not,  and  ye  will  not  be  condemned :  re- 

38  lease,  and  ye  will  be  released.  (38)  Give  ye,  and 
it  will  be  given  to  you;  in  good  measure,  pressed 
down,  and  running  over,  will  they  cast  into  your 
lap.     For,  with  what  measure  ve  measure,  it  will 

39  be  measured  to  you. — (39)  And  he  spake  a  simili- 
tudek  to  them:  Can  a  blind  man  lead  a  blind?  ^  oT.paraUe. 

40  Will  not  both  fall  into  the  ditch?— (40)  No  disci- 
ple is  better  than  his  teacher  ;i  for  whoever  is  per-  '  Sy.  RahU. 

41  feet,  will  be  like  his  teacher.— (41)  And  why 
observest  thou  the  straw  that  is  in  thy  brother  s 
eye,  but  regardest  not  the  beam  that  is  in  thy  own 

42  eye  ?  (42)  Or  how  canst  thou  say  to  thy  brother. 
My  brother,  allow  me  to  pluck  the  straw  from  thy 
eye ;  when,  lo,  the  beam  that  is  in  thy  own  eye, 
tnou  regardest  not.  Hypocrite  1  first  cast  the  beam 
out  thy  eye,  and  then  thy  vision  will  be  clear  to 

48  pluck  the  straw  from  thy  brother's  eye.  (43)  There 
IS  no  good  tree,  that  beareth  bad  fruits ;  nor  a  bad 

44  tree,  mat  beareth  good  fruits.  (44)  For  every  tree 
is  known  by  its  Suits.  Do  men  gather  figs  from 
thorn-bushes?    So,  neither  do  they  pluck  grapes 

45  from  brambles.  (45)  A  good  man,  from  the  good 
treasure  that  is  in  nis  heart,  bringeth  out  good 
things:  and  a  bad  man,  from  the  bad  treasure  that 
is  in  his  heart,  bringeth  out  bad  things.    For,  from 

46  the  abundance  of  the  heart,  the  lips  speak.  (46)  And 
why  call  ye  me.  My  Lord,  my  Lord ;  while  ye  do 

47  not  that  which  I  command  you  ?  (47)  Every  one 
that  Cometh  to  me,  and  heareth  my  words,  and 
doeth  them,  I  will  show  to  whom  he  is  like 

48  (48)  He  is  like  a  man  that  built  a  hooae ;  and  he 


Digitized  by 


Google 


116 


LUKE,   VJ. 


^  Sy,  ]  a  '^  a  n 


^  or,  a  syna- 
gcgve. 


'6j.1unuL 


^  By,  sons. 


dns  and  went  deep,  and  laid  the  foundations  on  a 
ro^ :  and  when  a  flood  occurred,  the  flood  rushed 
upon  that  house,  and  could  not  move  it,  for  its 
foundation  rested  on  a  rock.  (49)  But  he  that  49 
heareth  and  doeth  not,  is  like  a  man  that  built  his 
house  upon  the  earth,  without  a  foundation ;  and 
when  the  torrent  rushed  upon  it,  it  fell  immediately, 
and  the  ruin  of  that  house  was  great 

And  when  he  had  finished  all  these  discourses  VIL 
in  the    audience    of  the    people,   Jesus  entered 
into  Capernaum.    (2)  And  the  servant  of  a  cen-    2 
turion,  who  was  dear  to  him,  was  very  sick,  and 
near  to  death.    (8)  And  he  heard  of  Jesus,  and    8 
sent  the  Elders*  of  the  Jews  to  him,  and  requested 
of  him  that  he  would  come  and  save  the  life  of  his 
servant    (4^  And  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  they    4 
entreated  hun  earnestly,  and  said:  He  is  worthv 
that  thou  shouldst  do  this  for  him ;  (5)  for  he  lovetn    5 
our  nation,  and  hath   also  built  us  a  house  of 
assembly.**     (6)  And  Jesus  went  with  them.     And    6 
when  he  was  not  far  from  the  house,  the  centurion 
sent  his  friends  to  him,  and  said  to  him :  My  Lord, 
trouble  not  thyself,  for  I  am  not  worthy  that  thou 
shouldst  come  under  my  roof:    (7)  therefore  I     7 
deemed    myself   not   worthy    to    approach    thee 
myself;  but  speak  the  word  only,  and  my  young 
man  will  be  nealed.    (8)  For  I  also  am  a  man    8 
subjected  to  authority ;  and  I  have  soldiers  under 
my  command  ;c  and  I  say  to  this  one.  Go ;  and  he 
goeth:   and  to  another.  Come;   and  he  cometh: 
and  to  my  servant.  Do  this;  and  he  doeth  [it] 
(9)  And  when  Jesus  heard  these  things,  he  admired    9 
him ;  and  he  turned,  and  said  to  the  throng  that 
followed  him :  I  say  to  you,  I  have  not  found  faith 
like  this  even  in  Israel.     (10)  And  they  that  were  10 
sent,  returned  to  the  house ;  and  they  found  the 
servant  that  had  been  sick,  now  well. 

And  the  following  day,  he  went  to  a  city  called  11 
Nain  ]^  and  his  disciples  [were]  with  him,  and  a 
great  multitude.     (12)  And  as  he  approached  the  12 
gate  of  the  city,  he  saw  a  procession  bearing  a  dead 
man,  the  only  son®  of  his  mother,  and  she  a  widow ; 
and  a  great  company  of  the  people^  of  the  city 
were  with  her.    (13)  And  Jesus  looked  upon  her,  18 
and  had  compassion  on  her ;   and  he  said  to  her, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,    VIL 


117 


16 


17 


18 
19 


20 


21 


22 


14  Weep  not.  (14)  And  he  went,  and  touched  the 
bier ;  and  they  that  bore  him  stood  still.    And  he 

15  said :  Young  man,  I  say  to  thee,  Arise.  (15)  And 
the  dead  man  sat  up,  and  began  to  speak :  and  he 
delivered  him  to  his  mother.  {16)  And  awe 
seized  oil  the  people ;  and  they  glorined  Gbd,  and 
said :  A  great  prophet  hath  arisen  among  us,  and 
Gk)d  hath  visited  his  people.  (17)  And  that 
sayinefiT  respecting  him  went  out  through  all  Judsea 
and  all  the  surrounding  region. 

And  the  disciples  of  t^hn  told  him  all  these 
things.  (19)  And  John  called  two  of  his  disciples, 
and  sent  them  to  Jesus,  -  and  said :  Art  thou 
he  that  cometh,  or  shall  we  look  for  another? 
(20)  And  they  came  to  Jesus,  and  said  to  him: 
John  the  Baptizer  hath  sent  us  to  thee,  and 
saith :  Art  thou  he  that  cometh,  or  shall  we  look 
for  another?  (21)  And  in •  that  hour  he  healed 
many  persons  of  their  diseases,  and  of  plagues,  and 
of  unclean  spirits,  and  gave  sight  to  many  blind 
persons.  (22)  And  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to 
them :  Go  ye,  and  tell  John  all  that  ye  have  seen 
and  heard ;  that  the  blind  see,  and  the  lame  walk, 
and  the  leprous  are  cleansed,  and  the  deaf  hear, 
and  the  dead  arise,  and  to  the  poor  good  news  is 
28  proclaimed -.b  (28)  and  blessed  is  he  that  is  not 
24  stumbled  in  me.— (24)  And  when  John's  disciples 
were  gone,  Jesus  began  to  say  to  the  multitude, 
concerning  John :  What  went  ye  into  the  wilder- 
ness to  see? — ^a  reed  agitated  by  the  wind?  (25)  Or 
if  not ;  what  went  ye  out  to  see  ? — a  man  clad  in 
soft  raiment  ?  Lo,  they  that  use  splendid  garments 
and  luxuries,  are  in  kings'  palaces.*  (26)  Or  if 
not ;  what  went  ye  out  to  see  ? — a  prophet  ?  Yea, 
B&Y  I  to  you;  and  more  than  a  prophet  (27) 
[For]  this  is  he,  of  whom  it  is  written :  Behold  I 
send  my  messenger^  before  thy  face,  to  prepare 

28  thy  way  before  thee.  (28)  I  say  to  you,  that  no 
prophet,  among  those  born  of  women,  was  greater 
than  John  the  Baptizer :  and  yet  the  little  one  in 

29  the  kingdom  of  God,  is  greater  than  he.  (29)  And 
all  the  people  that  heard  him,  justified  Goi  as  they 

80  had  been  baptized  with  John's  baptism.  (30)  But 
the  Pharisees  and  Scribes  rejected  the  good  pleasure 
of  God,   against  themselves;   as  they  were  not 

31  baptized  by  him.    (31)  To  what,  therefore,  shall  I 


ts    or,  vxtrd. 


25 


26 
27 


*  or,  houses. 


^  Sy.  «A^)hfl 


Digitized  by 


Google 


118 


LUKE,   VII. 


Sy.  lASnoM 


compare  this  generation?   and  to  what  are  thej 
like  ?    (32)  They  are  like  children,  that  sit  in  the  32 
market-place,  and  call  to  their  fellows  and  say: 
We  have  piped  to  you,  and  ve  did  not  dance;  we 
have    howled    to    you,   and   ye   did   not  weep. 
(33^  For  John  the  fiaptizer  cam©,  not  eating  bread,  38 
ana  not  drinking  wine ;  and  ye  say :  He  hath  a 
demon.    (34)  The  Son  of  man  came,  eating  and  84 
drinking ;  and  ye  say :  Behold,  a  gluttonous  man, 
and  a  wine  drinker,  and  one  fond  of  publicans  and 
sinners.     (35)  But  wisdom^  is  justified  by  all  her  86 
children. 

And  one  of  the  Pharisees  came,  and  asked  him  36 
to  eat  with  him.    And  he  entered  the  house  of  the 
Pharisee,  and  reclined.     (37)  And  there  was  a  87 
woman  in  the  city,  who  was  a  sinner;  and  when 
she    learned  that  he  reclined    in  the  Pharisee's 
house,   she  took  an -alabaster  box  of  perfume, 
(38^  and  stood  behind  him,  at  his  feet,  and  wept;  88 
ana  she  began  to  bathe  his  feet  with  her  tears,  and 
to  wipe  them  with  the  hair  of  her  head ;   and  she 
kissed  his  feet,  and  anointed  [them]  with  the  per- 
fume.   (89)  And  when  the  Pnarisee  that  invited  89 
him,  saw  it,  he  thought  within  himself  and  said : 
If  this  man  were  a  prophet,  he  would  know  who 
she  is,  and  what  is  her  reputation ;  for  the  woman 
that  toucheth  him,  is  a  sinner.    (40)  And  Jesus  40 
answered,  and  said  to  him :  Simon,  I  have  some- 
thing to  say  to  thee.    He  said  to  him:  Say  it, 
Eabbi.    Jesus  said  to  him :    (41)  There  were  two  41 
debtors  to  a  certain  creditor ;  tne  one  owed  him 
five  hundred  denarii,  and  the  other  fifty  denarii 
(42)  And  as  they  had  not  the  means  of  pay,  he  42 
released  them  both.     Which  of  them,  therefore, 
will  love  him  most?     (43)   Simon  replied,  and  48 
said:  I  suppose  he  to  whom  most  was  released. 
Jesus  said  to  him:  Thou  hast  judged  correctly. 
(44)  And  he  turned  to  the  woman,  and  said  to  44 
Simon:    Seest  thou  this  woman?   I  entered  thy 
house,  and  thou  gavest  [me]  no  water  for  my 
feet ;  but  she  hath  bathed  my  feet  with  her  tears, 
and  wiped  them  with  her  hair.     (45)  Thou  gavest  45 
me  no  kiss ;  but  this  woman,  since  she  came  in, 
hath  not  ceased  to  kiss  my  feet.    (46)  Thou  didst  46 
not  anoint  my  head  with  perfume ;  but  she  hath 
anointed  my  feet  with  perfumed  ointment    (47)  I  47 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,    VIII. 


119 


Sy. 

Sy. 
Sy. 


or, 


therefore  say  to  thee :  Her  many  sins  are  forgiven 
her,  for  she  loveth  much.    But  he,  to  whom  little 

48  is  forgiven,  loveth  little.     (48)  And  he  said  to  the 

49  woman:  Thy  sins  are  forgiven  thee.  (49)  And 
they  that  were  reclining,  began  to  say  in  them- 
selves:   Who  is  this,  that  even  forgiveth  sins? 

50  (50^  And  Jesus  said  to  the  woman:  Thy  faith 
hatn  given  thee  life.    Go,  in  peace. 

VTEL  And  after  these  things  Jesus  travelled  about 
the  cities  and  the  villages,  and  proclaimed  and 
announced  the  kingdom  of  God.     And  with  him 

2  were  his  twelve  [disciples,]  (2)  and  those  women 
who  were  healed  of  infirmities  and  of  unclean 
spirits,  Mary  called  Magdalena,*  out  of  whom  went 

8  seven  demons,  (8)  and  Joanna*»  the  wife  of  Chusa, 
Herod's  steward,  and  Susanna,c  and  many  others, 
who  ministered  to  them  of  their  property. 

4  And  when  a  great  multitude  was  assembled,  and 
Pjeople  came  to  him  from  all  the  cities,  he  said,  in 

5  similitudes  :<*  (5)  A  sower  went  out  to  sow  his 
seed :  and  as  he  sowed,  some  fell  by  the  side  of 
the  path,  and  was    trodden  upon,   and  a  bird 

6  devoured  it.  (6)  And  other  fell  upon  a  rock,  and 
sprung  up  forthwith ;  but,  as  it  lacKcd  moisture,  it 

7  cfried  up.  (7)  And  other  fell  among  thorns,  and 
the  thorns  sprung  up  with  it,  and  choked  it 

8  (8)  And  other  fell  on  good  and  fair  ground,  and 

Strung  up,  and  bore  fruits,  a  hundred  for  one. 
aving  said  these  thiugs,  he  cried :  He  that  hath 
ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

9  And  his  disciples  asked  him:    what  meaneth 

10  this  similitude  ?     (10)  And  he  said  to  them :  To 
you  it  is  given,  to  know  the  mysteries*  of  the  •  Sy.  ji|j 
tingdom  of  God ;  but  to  others,  it  is  spoken  in 
allegories  ;^  that,  while  seeing,  they  may  not  see,  f  Sy.  ]Z]]i!LO 

11  and  while  hearing,  may  not  understand.  (11)  But 
this  is  the  similitude:  The  seed  is  the  word  of 

12  God.    (12)  And  those  by  the  side  of  the  path,  are 
tiiev  that  hear  the  word,  and  the  enemy  8r  cometh  '  Sy. 
and  taketh  the  word  out  of  their  heart,  that  they    I'^OgNsn 

18  may  not  believe  and  live.  (18)  And  those  uj)on 
the  rock,  are  they  who,  when  they  hear,  receive 
the  word  with  joy:  but  they  have  no  root  in 
them,  and  their  faith  is  temporary,  and  in  time  of 

14  temptation^  they  are   stumbled.     (14)   And  thath  or,  trial. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


120 


LUKE,  VIIL 


or,  lusts. 


^By.^i 


By.U 


H 


which  fell  among  thorns,  are  those  who  hear  the 
word,  but  are  choked  by  cares,  and  by  riches,  and 
by  worldly  desires,*  and  bear  no  fruits.     (15)  And  16 
that    on  good    ground,   are  those  who,   with  a 
humble  and  good  heart,  hear  the  word,  and  retain 
it,  and  with  patience  bring  forth  fruits. — (16)  No  16 
one  lighteth  a  lamp,  and  covereth  it  with  a  vessel, 
or  placeth  it  under  a  bed,  but  setteth  it  upon  a 
light-stand,  that  all  who  come  in,  may  see  the  light 
of  it    (17)  For  there  is  nothing  covered,  that  shall  17 
not  be  uncovered;  nor  concealed,  that  shall  not 
be  known  and  become  manifest    (18)  Take  heed  18 
how  ye  hear :  for  to  him  that  hath,  shall  be  given; 
and  from  him  that  hath  not,  shall  be  taken  even 
what  he  thinketh  he  hath. — (19)  And  his  mother  19 
and  his  brothers  came  to  him,  and  they  could  not 
roeak  with  him,  because  of  the  multitude.    (20)  20 
And  they   say  to  him:    Thy  mother  and  thy 
brothers  stand  without,   and  wish  to  see  thee. 
(21)  And  he  answered  and  said :  My  mother  and  21 
my  brothers,  are  they  who  hear  the  word  of  God, 
and  do  it 

And  on  a  certain  day  Jesus  embarked  and  sat  22 
in  a  ship,  he  and  his  disciples.    And  he  said  to 
them ;  Let  us  pass  over  to  the  other  side  of  the 
sea.    (28)  Ana  while  they  were  rowing,  Jesus  fell  28 
asleep.    And  there  was  a  tempest  of  wmd  on  the 
sea ;  and  the  ship  was  near  to  sinking.    (24)  And  24 
they  came  and  awaked  him,  and  said  to  him: 
Our  Eabbi,  our  Eabbi,^  we  are  perishing  I   And 
he  arose,  and  rebuked  the  winds  and  the  agita- 
tions of  the  water;    and  they  ceased,  and  there 
was  a  calm.    (25)  And  he  said  to  them:  Where 
is  your  faith  ?  And  they  being  in  awe,  wondered, 
and  said  one  to  another :   Who  is  this,  that  com- 
mandeth  even  the  winds,  and  the  waves,  and  the 
sea ;  and  they  obey  him  ? 

And  they  rowed  on,  and  came  to  the  country  of 


26 


26 


the  Gadarenes,!  which  lieth  over  against  Galilee. 
(27)  And  when  he  went  out  upon  the  land,  there  27 
met  him  a  man  of  the  city,  in  whom  had  been  a 
demon  for  a  long  time ;  and  he  wore  no  clothing, 
and  did  not  reside  in  a  house,  but  among  the 
tombs.  (28)  And  when  he  saw  Jesus,  he  cried  28 
out,  and  fell  down  before  him,  and  said,  with  a  loud 
voice:  What  have  we  to  do  wilii  thee?  Jesus,  thou 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  VIII. 


121 


Son  of  the  exalted  God.    I  entreat  of  thee,  torment 

29  me  not  (29)  For  Jesus  had  commanded  the 
unclean  spirit,  to  come  out  of  the  man :  for,  of  a 
long  time  he  had  been  held  captive  by  him ;  and 
he  had  been  bound  with  chains,  and  held  in 
fetters;  but  he  had  burst  the  bonds,  and  had  been 

30  driven  by  the  demon  into  the  desert.  (80)  And 
Jesus  demanded  of  him:  What  is  thy  name? 
And  he  said  to  him:   Legion:™   because  many 

31  demons  had  entered  into  nim.  (81)  And  they 
besouffht  him,  not  to  command  them  to  depart 

32  into  the  abyss.**  (82)  And  there  was  a  herd  of 
many  swine  grazing  on  the  mountain.  And  they 
besought  him,  that  he  would  permit  them  to  enter 

33  the  swine.  And  he  permitted  them.  (83)  And 
the  demons  went  out  of  the  man,  and  entered  the 
swine;  and  the  whole  herd  ran  to  a  precipice,® 
and  plunged  into  the  sea,  and  were  strangled. 

34  (H4)  And  when  the  herdmen  saw  what  had 
occurred,  they  fled,  and  told  [it]  in  the  cities  and 

85  the  villages.  (36)  And  the  men  went  out  to  see 
what  was  done.  And  they  came  to  Jesus,  and 
found  the  man,  out  of  whom  the  demons  had 
gone,  now  clothed,  and  modest,  and  sitting  at  the 

36  feet  of  Jesus ;  and  they  were  awed.  (86)  And 
they  that  saw  [it],  related  to  them  in  what  manner 

37  the  demoniac  was  cured.  (37)  And  the  whole 
throngp  of  the  Gadarenes  requested  him,  that 
he  would  depart  from  them:  for  great  fear  had 
seized  them.    And  Jesus  embarkeain  a  ship,  and 

38  retired  from  among  them.  (38)  And  the  man, 
from  whom  the  demons  had  gone  out,  requested 
that  he  might  remain  with  him.    But  Jesus  dis- 

39  missed  him,  and  said  to  him:  (89)  Beturn  to  thy 
home,  and  relate  what  God  hath  done  for  thee. 
And  he  went  away,  and  proclaimed  through  all 
the  ciW  what  Jesus  had  done  for  him. 

40  And  when  Jesus  returned,  a  great  multitude 
received    him;    for  all  were    looking    for  him. 

41  (41)  And  a  man,  whose  name  was  Jairus,'  a  chief 
of  the  synagogue,"  fell  down  at  the  feet  of  Jesus, 

42  and  besought  nim  to  enter  his  house;  (42)  for  he 
had  an  only*  daughter,  about  twelve  years  old, 
and  she  was  near  dying.  And  as  Jesus  went  with 
him,    a    great    multitude    pressed    upon  him. — 

48  (48)    And  a  certain  woman,   whose  blood  had 


Sy.  )S000l/ 


or, 


p  or,  tnvUUuie 


Sy.  ^i]Q^ 
Sy.  ^jL^i 

1^> 


Digitized  by 


Google 


122 


LUKE,  IX. 


^  Gr.  PeUr, 
^  Sy.  ^5 

X  Sy.  U 

y  Sy.  eyes. 


•Sy. 

•  Sy.  Ij.SL^LD 


Sy.  lAAZ 
Sy.  GVisjOS 


flowed  twelve  years,  and  who  had  expended  all 
her  property  among  physicians,  and  could  not  be 
cured  by  any  one,  (44^  came  up  behind  him,  and  44 
touched  the  border  oi  his  garment;   and  imme- 
diately the  flow  of  her  blood  stopped.    (45)  And  45 
Jesus  said:    Who  touched  me?     And  when  all 
denied,  Simon  Cephas^  and  those  with  him  said 
to  him:    Our  Eabbi,^  crowds  press  upon  thee; 
and  say  est  thou,  Who  touched  me?     (46)  And  46 
he  said:  Some  one  touched  me;  for  I  perceive, 
that  energy*  hath  gone  out  from  me.    (47)  And  47 
the  woman,  when  she  saw  that  she  had  not  escaped 
his  notice,  came  trembling,  and  fell  down  and  wor- 
shipped him.     And  in  the  presenceT  of  all  the 
people,  she  declared  for  what  cause  she  had  touched 
him,  and  that  she  was  instantly  healed.    (48)  And  48 
Jesus  said  to  her:  Take  courage,  my  daughter: 
Thy  feith  hath  given  thee  life:   Go  in  peace. — 
(49)     And  while  he  was    speaking,    one   came  49 
from  the  house  of  the  chief  of  the  synagogue,* 
and  said  to  him:  Thy  daughter  is  dead;  trouble 
not  the  teacher.*     (50)  And  Jesus  heard  [it],  and  50 
said  to  the  father  of  the  maid:  Fear  not;  believe 
only,  and  she  will  live.     (51)   And  Jesus  came  51 
to  the  house ;  and  he  suffered  none  to  go  in  with 
him,   except  Simon,  and  James,  and  John,  and 
the  £sither  and  mother  of  the  maid.    (52)  And  all  52 
were  weeping  and  wailing  over  her.     And  Jesus 
said :  Weep  not ;  for  she  is  not  dead,  but  sleepeth. 
(53)  And  thev  derided  him,  knowing  that  she  was  53 
dead.    (54J  And  he  put  every  one  out,  and  took  54 
her  by  the  nand,  and  called,  and  said:  Maid,  arise.** 

(55)  And  her  spirit^  returned,  and  she  instantly  55 
arose.    And  he  directed  them  to  give  her  food. 

(56)  And  her  parents  were  astonished:   and  he  56 
charged  them  to  tell  no  one  what  had  occurred. 

And  Jesus  called  his  twelve,  and  gave  them  IX. 
power  and  authority  over  all  demons  and  diseases, 
to  heal  [them].    (2)  And  he  sent  them  forth,  to  pro-    2 
claim  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  to  heal  the  sick. 
(3)  And  he  said  to  them:  Take  nothing  for  Ae    8 
journey,  neither  a  staff,  nor  a  wallet,  nor  bread, 
nor  money;   neither  have  two  tunics.     (4)  And    4 
into  whatever  house  ye  enter,   there  stay,  and 
thence  depart.     (5)  And  against  them  that  receive    6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   IX. 


128 


you  not^  when  ve  go  out  of  that  city,  shake  oflF 
even  the  dust  of  your  feet  against  them,  for  a  testi 

6  mony.  (6)  And  the  Legates"  went  forth,  and  trav- 
elled about  the  villages  and  cities,  and  preached 
and  healed  everywhere. 

7  And  Herod  the  Tetrarch  heard  of  all  the  things 
done  by  him,  and  he  was  disturbed ;  because  some 

8  said,  that  John  had  arisen  from  the  dead.  (8)  But 
others  said,  that  Elijah  hath  appeared ;  and  others, 
that  a  prophet  from  among  the  ancient  prophets 

9  hath  arisen.  (9)  And  Herod  said:  The  head  of 
John,  I  have  cut  oflf ;  but  who  is  this,  of  whom  I 
hear  these  things?  And  he  was  desirous  to  see 
him. 

10  And  when  the  Legates^  returned,  they  narrated 
to  Jesus  all  they  had  done.    And  he  took  them 

11  aside,  to  the  desert  part  of  Bethsaida.  (ID  And 
when  the  multitude  knew  [it],  they  followea  him : 
and  he  received  them,  and  conversed  with  them 
respecting  the  kingdom  of  God:  and  such  as  had 

12  need  of  healing,  he  healed.  (12)  And  when  the 
day  began  to  decline,  his  disciples  came  near,  and 
said  to  him :  Send  away  the  multitude,  that  they 
may  go  to  the  villages  around  us  and  to  the 
towns,  to  lodge  in  them,  and  to  procure  themselves 

13  food,  for  we  are  in  a  desert  place.  (18)  Jesus  said 
to  them :  Give  ye  them  to  eat.  And  they  say : 
We  have  no  more  than  five  loaves  and  two  fishes ; 
unless  we  go  and  buy  food  fnr  all  tins  people: 

14  (14)  for  they  were  about  five  thousand  men.  Jesus 
said  to  them:  Make  them  recline  by  companies, 

15  fifty  persons  in  a  company.    (15)  And  the  disci- 

16  pies  did  so,  and  made  tnem  all  recline.  (16)  And 
Jesus  took  the  five  loaves  and  two  fishes,  and 
looked  towards  heaven,  and  blessed,  and  brake, 
and  gave  to  his  disciples  to  set  before  the  multi- 

17  tudes.  (17)  And  they  all  ate,  and  were  satisfied: 
and  they  took  up  the  fragments  of  remains,  twelve 
baskets.<^ 

18  And  as  he  was  praying  in  private  with  his  dis- 
ciples, he  asked  them,  ana  said:  Who,  do  the  mul- 

19  titudes  say  of  me,  that  I  am  ?  (19)  They  answer 
and  say  to  him:  John  the  Baptizer ;  others,  Elijah; 
and  others,  a  prophet,  one  of  the  ancient  prophets 

20' arisen.  (20)  He  said  to  them:  But  who,  do  ye 
say,  that  I  am  ?    Simon  answered,  and  said :  The 

Digitized  by 


or.  Apostles. 


*»  or.  Apostles, 


Sy. 


ii  i^Kin 


Google 


124 

dSy. 
01 »»  ■  aV) 


«  or  f  every  one. 
<  Sy.  aijB.2U 


^  or,  ttwds. 


iSy. 


kSy. 


Sy.  had  been. 


LUKE.   IX. 

Messiah^  of  God.    (21)  And  he  chided  them,  and  21 
charged  them,  that  tJiey  should  say  this  to  no  one. 
(22^  And  he  said  to  them :  The  Son  of  man  is  to  22 
suffer  many  things,  and  to  be  rejected  by  the  Elders 
and  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes ;  and  they  will 
kill  him;  and  on  the  third  day,  he  will  arise. — 
(23)  And  he  said  before  all  the  people  i^  He  that  23 
would  follow  me,  must  deny  himself,  and  take  up 
his  cross  daily,  and  [so]  come  after  me.    (24)  Fpr  24 
he  that  will  preserve  his  life,^  shall  lose  it;  but  he 
that  shall  lose  his  life,  for  my  sake,  will  preserve  it. 
(25)  For,  what  will  a  man  be  profited,  if  he  gain  25 
the  whole  world,  and  lose  his  life?  or  be  deprived 
[of  it]  ?    (26)  And  whoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  26 
me  and  of  my  words,  of  him  will  the  Son  of  man 
be  ashamed,  when  he  cometh  in  the  glory  of  his 
Father,  with  his  holy  angels.— (27)  I  tell  you  the  27 
truth,  that  there  are  some  standing  here,  who  will 
not  taste  death,  until  they  shall  see  the  kingdom  of 
God. 

And  it  was  about  eight  days  after  these  dis-  28 
courses,**  that  Jesus  took  Simon  and  James  and 
John,  and  went  up  a  mountain  to  pray.    (29)  And  29 
while  he  prayed,  the  aspect  of  his  countenance  was 
changed,  and  his  garments  became  white  and  bril- 
liant    (30)  And  lo,  two  men  were  talking  with  30 
him:  and  they  were  Moses  and  Elijah,  (31)  who  31 
appeared  in  glory. »     And  they  were  conversing  on 
his  departure,  which  was  to  be  consummated  at 
Jerusalem.     (32)  And  Simon  and  those  with  him  32 
were  oppressed  with  drowsiness ;  and  being  scarcely 
awake,  they  saw  his  glory,  "^  and  those  two  men 
who  stood  near  him.     (33)  And  when  they  began  83 
to  retire  from  him,  Simon  said  to  Jesus :  !Kabbi,  it 
is  delightful  for  us  to  be  here.     And  let  us  make 
here  three  booths,  one  for  thee,  and  one  for  Moses, 
and  one  for  Elijah.    But  he  knew  not  what  he 
said.    (34)  And  as  he  thus  spoke,  there  was  a  cloud ;  84 
and  it  overshadowed  them ;  and  they  were  afraid, 
when  they  saw  Moses  and  Elijah  go  up  into  the 
cloud.    (35)  And  there  was  a  voice  from  the  cloud,  85 
which  said :  This  is  my  beloved  Son ;  hear  ye  him. . 
(36)  And  when  the  voice  had  passed,i  Jesus  was  36 
found  to  be  alone. — And  they  kept  silence,  and 
told  no  one  in  those  days  what  they  had  seen.        *    . 

And  the  next  day,  as  they  came  down  from  the  87 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUK£,  IX. 

88  mountain,  a  great  multitude  met  them.  (38)  And 
a  man  from  the  throng  cried  out,  and  said: 
Teacher,™  I  beseech  thee,  turn  thyself  to  me.    Here 

89  is  my  only"  son :  (89)  and  a  spirit  cometh  upon 
him,  and  he  suddenly  crieth  out,  and  gnasheth  his 
teeth,  and  foameth;  and  he  hardly  leaveth  him, 

40  when  he  hath  crushed  him.  (40)  And  I  requested 
thy  disciples  to  expel  him ;  and  they  could  not. 

41  (41)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said :  O  the  unbe- 
lieving and  perverse  generation!  How  long  shall 
I  be  with  you,  and  bear  with  you?    Bring  hither 

42  thy  son.  (42)  And  while  he  was  bringing  him, 
the  demon  threw  him  down,  and  convulsea  him. 
And  Jesus  rebuked  the  unclean  spirit,  and  healed 

48  the  lad,  and  delivered  him  to  his  father.  (43)  And 
they  were  all  amazed  at  the  majesty^  of  God. — 
And  while  every  one  admired  at  all  that  Jesus 

44  did,  he  said  to  his  disciples:  (44)  Lay  up  these 
words  in  your  minds  :P  for  the  Son  of  man  is  to 

46  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  men.  (45)  But 
they  understood  not  that  speech;'  because  it  was 
hidden  from  them,  that  they  should  not  know  it : 
and  they  feared  to  ask  him  concerning  that  speech. 

46  And  the  thought  arose  among  them,  which  of 

47  them  [was  to  be]  the  greatest  (47)  And  Jesus 
knew  the  thought  of  their  heart:  and  he  took  a 

48  child,  and  placed  him  near  to  him ;  (48)  and  said 
to  them:  Whoever  receiveth  a  child  like  this,  in 
my  name,  receiveth  me ;  and  he  that  receiveth  me, 
receiveth  him  that  sent  me.  For  he  that  shall  be 
least  among  you  all,  he  will  be  the  great  one. — 

49  (49)  And  John  answered,  and  said:  Our  Eabbi, 
we  saw  a  man  casting  out  demons  in  thy  name; 
and  we  forbad  him,  because  he  doth  not,  with  us, 

60  follow  thee.    (50)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Forbid  not : 

for,  whoever  is  not  against  you,  is  for  you. 
51      And  when  the  days  for  his  ascension  were  com 

Sleted,  so  it  was,  that  he  set  his  face  to  go  up  to 
erusalem.  (52)  And  he  sent  messengers  before 
his  fece ;  and  they  went,  and  entered  a  village  of 
the  Samaritans,   to  prepare   [lodgings]   for  him. 

63  (53)  And  they  received  nim  not,  because  he  had 

64  set  his  face  to  go  up  to  Jerusalem.  (54)  And 
when  his  disciples  James  and  John  saw  [it],  they 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  wilt  thou  that  we  speak, 
and  fire  come  down  from  heaven,  and  consume 


12fi 
Sy.  Uh-^- 


oiZooiX} 


p  Sy.  eon. 
'  or,  Hard. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


126 


^  Sy.  sons  oj  my 
house. 


lit.your  peace. 


LUKE,   X. 

them,  as  also  did  Elijah?    (65)  And  he  turned,  66 
and  rebuked  them,  and  said :  Ye  know  not  of  what 
spirit  ye  are.    (56)  For  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  56 
come  to  destroy  souls  ;•  but  to  quicken*  [them]. 
And  they  went  to  another  village. 

And  as  they  went  by  the  way,  one  said  to  him :  57 
I  will  follow  thee  to  whatever  place  thou  goest, 
my  Lord.    (58)  Jesus  said  to  him:  The  foxes  68 
have  holes,  and  the  birds  of  heaven  have  coverts ; 
but  the  Son  of  man  hath  not  where  he  may  lay  his 
head    (59)  And  he  said  to  another:  Come  thou  69 
after  me.    And  he  said  to  him:  My  Lord,  permit 
me  first  to  go  and  bury  my  father.    (60)  And  60 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Allow  the  dead  to  burv  their 
dead;  and  go  thou  and  proclaim  the  kingdom  of 
God.    (61)  Another  saia  to  .him:   I  will  follow  61 
thee,  my  Lord ;  but  allow  me  first  to  bid  adieu  to 
my  household,  ▼  and  I  will  come.    (62)  Jesus  said  62 
to  him :  No  man  putting  his  hand  to  the  ox-plough, 
and  looking  backward,  is  fit  for  the  kingdom  of 
God. 


And  after  these  things,  Jesus  separated  irom  X. 
among  his  disciples  seventy  other  persons,  and  sent 
them,  two  and  two,  before  his  face,  to  everv  place 
and  city  whither  he  was  to  go.     (2)  And  he  said 
to  them:  The  harvest  is  great,  ana  the  laborers 
few :  pray  ye,  therefore,  the  lord  of  the  harvest, 
that   he  would  send  laborers    into   his  harvest 
(8)  Go  ye:  lo,  I  send  you  forth,  as  sheep  among 
wolves.     (4)  Take  to  you  no  purses,  nor  wallets, 
nor  shoes ;  and  salute  no  man  by  the  way.   (5)  And 
into  whatever  house  ye  enter,  first  say :  Peace  be 
to  this  house.     (6)  And  if  the  son  of  peace  is  there, 
your  salutation*  will  rest  upon  it ;  but  if  not,  your 
salutation  will  return  to  you.     (7)  And  remain  in    7 
that  house,  eating  and  drinking  oi  what  it  affords ; 
for  the  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  hire.    And  pass 
not  from  house  to  house.     (8)  And  into  whatever    8 
city  ye  enter,  and  they  receive  you ;  eat  that  which 
is  set  before  you.    (9)  And  heal  them  that  are  sick    9 
in  it ;  and  say  to  them :  The  kingdom  of  God  hath 
come  near  you.    (10)  And  into  whatever  city  ye  10 
enter,  and  they  receive  you  not;  go  out  into  the 
street,  and  say :  (11)  Even  the  dust  of  your  city  11 
which  adhereth  to  our  feet,  we  shake  off  against 


2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   X. 

vou:  but  this  know  ye,  that  the  kingdom  of  God 

12  hath  come  near  to  you.  (12)  I  say  to  you,  that  for 
Sodom  there  will  be  comfort  in  that  day,  rather 

13  than  for  that  city.  (18)  Woe  to  thee,  Chorazin; 
woe  to  thee,  Bethsaioa ;  for  if  in  Tyre  and  Sidon 
there  had  been  the  mighty  deeds,  that  were  in  you, 
they  would  long  ago  have  repented  in  sackcloth 

14  and  ashes.  (14J  But  for  Tyre  and  Sidon  there  will 
be  comfort  in  tne  d^y  of  judgment,  rather  than  for 

15  you.  •  (15)  And  thou  Capernaum,  that  art  lifted 
up  to  heaven,  shalt  be  brought  down  to  heU.^ — 

16  (16)  He  that  heareth  you,  heareth  me ;  and  he  that 
despiseth  you,  despiseth  me ;  and  he  that  despiseth 
me,  despiseth  him  that  sent  me. 

17  And  the  seventy  whom  he  sent  forth,  returned 
with  great  joy,  and  say  to  him :  Our  Lord,  even  the 

18  demons  were  subject  to  us,  in  thy  name.  (18)  And 
he  said  to  them :  I  saw  Satan^  fall,  like  the  light- 

19  ning  from  heaven.  (19)  Behold,  I  give  you  author- 
ity to  tread  on  serpents,  and  scorpions,  and  on  all 
the  power<J  of  the  adversary :«  and  nothing  shall 

20  harm  you.     (20)  Yet  rejoice  not-  in  this,  that  the 
•  demons  are  subject  to  you;  but  rejoice,  that  your 

21  names  are  written  in  heaven.— (21)  In  that  hour 
Jesus  exulted  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  said :  I  thank 
thee,  my  Father,  thou  liord  of  heaven  and  earth, 
that  thou  hast  hid  these  things  from  the  wise  and 
intelligent,  and  hast  revealed  them  to  babes:  yes, 

22  my  Father,  for  such  was  thy  good  pleasure.  (22) 
And  he  turned  himself  to  his  disciples,  and  saia  to 
them:  Every  thing  is  conmiitted  to  me  by  my 
Father:  and  no  one  knoweth  who  the  Son  is,  but 
the  Father ;  or  who  the  Father  is.  but  the  Son,  and 
he  to  whom  the  Son  is  pleased  to  reveal  [him], 

23  (23J  And  he  turned  to  his  disciples,  privately,  and 
saia:  Blessed  are  the  eyes  that  see,  what  ye  see. 

24  (24)  For  I  say  to  you,  that  many  prophets  and 
dngs  desired  to  see  what  ye  see,  and  did  not  see 
'it] ;  and  to  hear  what  ye  hear,  and  did  not  hear 
[it]. 

25  And  behold,  a  Scribe  stood  up  to  try  him,  and 
said :  Teacher,^  what  must  I  do,  to  inherit  eternal 

26  life?    (26)   And  Jesus  said  to  him:   How  is  it 

27  written  in  the  law U  How  readest  thou?  (27)  He 
answered  and  said  to  him:  Thou  shalt  love  the 
Lord  thy  Qod,  with  all  thy  heart,  and  with  all  thy 


127 


=  *%. 


Sy.  CJlNa»i 

Sy. 


fay  ]<gvVlr 

»  Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


128 

^  Sy.  \ijl1J, 
hUeOect, 


'*  Sy.  lAflD 
^  Sy.  Ula;l0 


LUKE,   XI. 

soul,  and  with  all  thy  might,  and  with  all  thy 
mind;*»  and  thy  neighbor,  as  thyself.     (28)  Jesus  28 
said  to  him :  Thou  hast  said  correctly ;  do  thus,  and 
thou  wilt  live.     (29)   And  he,  being  disposed  to  29 
justify  himself,  said:  And  who  is  my  neighbor? 
(30)  Jesus  said  to  him :  A  certain  man  was  going  30 
down  from  Jerusalem  to  Jericho,  and  robbers  fell 
upon  him,  and  plundered  him,  and  smote  him,  and 
left  him  with  little  life  in  him,  and  went  their  way. 
{Bl\  And  a  certain  priest  went  down  by  thatjsvay ;  31 
ana  he  saw  him,  and  passed  on.    (32^  So  also  a  32 
Levite  came,  approached  the  spot,  ana  saw  him, 
and  passed  on.     (33)  But  a  Samaritan,  as  he  trav-  33 
elled,  came  where  he  was,  and  saw  him,  and  took 
pity  on  him,  (34)  and  went  to  him,  and  bound  up  34 
his  wounds,  and  poured  wine  and  oil  on  them,  and 
placed  him  upon  his  ass,  and  brought  him  to  the 
inn,  and  took  care  of  him.    (35)  And  on  the  morn-  3S 
ing  of  the  [next]  day,  he  took  out  two  denarii  and 
gave  to  the  host,  and  said :   Take  good  care  of 
him ;  and  if  thou  expendest  any  more,  when  I  re- 
turn, I  will  repay  thee.    (36)  Which  therefore  of  86 
these  three,  appears  to  thee,  to  have  been  neigh-  ' 
bor  to  him  that  fell  into  the  hands  of  marauders? 
(37)  And  he  said :  He  that  had  pity  on  hiuL  Jesus  37 
said  to  him :  Go,  and  do  thou  also  the  like. 

And  it  occurred,  as  they  travelled  by  the  way,  38 
that  he  entered  a  certain  village,  and  a  woman 
whose  name  was  Martha,*   received  him  at  her 
house.    (39)  And  she  had  a  sister  whose  name  39 
was  Mary  :^  and  she  came  and  seated  herself  at  the 
feet  of  our  Lord,  and  listened  to  his  discourses. 
(40)  But  Martha  was  occupied  with  much  service ;  40 
and  she  came,  and  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  hast  thou 
no  concern,  that  my  sister  hath  left  me  to  serve 
alone  ?    Bid  her  assist  me.    (41)  Jesus  answered,  41 
and  said  to  her :  Martha,  Martha,  thou  art  anxious 
and  troubled  about  many  things:   (42)  yet  but  42 
one  thing  is  necessary ;  and  Mary  hath  chosen  for 
herself  the  good  part,  which  shall  not  be  taken 
from  her. 

And  as  he  was  praying  in  a  certain  place,  it  XI 
occurred,  that  when  he  ceased,  one  of  his  disciples 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  teach  us  to  pray,  as  John 
also  taught  his  disciples.    (2)  Jesus  said  to  them:    2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XL  129 

When  ye  pray,  thus  speak  ye :  Our  Father  who 
art  in  heaven,  hallowea  be  thy  name;  thy  king- 
dom come ;  thy  pleasure  be  done,  as  in  heaven,  so 

3  on  earth;  (8)  give  us  daily  the  bread  we  need; 

4  (4)  and  remit  to  us  our  sins,  for  we  also  remit  to  all 
that  are  indebted  to  us;  and  bring  us  not  into 

5  trials,  but  deliver  us  from  evil. — (5)  And  he  said 
to  them:  Which  of  you  shall  have  a  friend,  that 
shall  come  to  him  at  midnight  and  say  to  him,  Mv 

6  friend,  lend  me  three  cakes;  (6)  for  a  friend  hath 
come  to  me  from  a  ioumey,  and  I  have  nothing  to 

7  set  before  him  ?  u  ^  And  his  friend  within  shall 
answer,  and  say  to  nmi :  Do  not  disturb  me,  for  lo, 
the  door  is  closed,  and  my  children  Mrith  me  in 

8  bed ;  I  cannot  rise  and  give  thee.  (8)  I  say  to  you : 
If  he  give  him  not,  on  account  oi  friendship,  yet 
on  account  of  piis]  importunity,  he  will  arise  and 

9  give  [him]  as  much  as  he  asketh.  (9)  I  say  also 
to  you :  Ask,  and  it  will  be  ^ven  you ;  seek,  and 
ye  will  find;  knock,  and  it  will  be  opened  to  you. 

10  (10)  For  every  one  that  asketh^  receiveth;  and  he 
that  seeketh,  nndeth;  and  to  him  that  knocketh, 

11  it  is  opened.  (11)  For  which  of  you  being  a  father, 
if  his  son  shall  ask  him  for  bread,  will  he  reach  to 
him  a  stone?    Or,  if  he  ask  of  him  a  fish,  will  he, 

12  instead  of  a  fish,  reach  to  him  a  serpent?  (12)  Or, 
if  he  ask  of  him  an  e^g,  will  he  reach  to  him  a 

18  scorpion?  (13)  And  ii  ye,  who  are  evil,  know 
how  to  give  good  gifts  to  your  children,  how  much 
more  will  your  Father  from  heaven  give  the  Holy 
Spirit  to  them  that  ask  him  ? 

14  And  as  he  was  casting  out  a  demon  that  was 
dumb,  it  occurred,  that  when  the  demon  had  gone 
out,  the  dumb  [man]  conversed:  and  the  multi- 

15  tudes  admired.  (16)  But  some  of  them  said:  It  is 
by  Beelzebub,*  the  prince  of  demons,^  that  he  cast- 

16  eth'  out  demons.    (16)  And  others,  to  tempt  him, 

17  asked  of  him  a  sign  from  heaven.  (17)  But  Jesus, 
as  he  knew  their  thoughts,  said  to  them :  Every 
kingdom  that  is  divided  against  itself  will  become 
a  desolation :  and  a  house  that  is  divided  against 

18  itself  will  ML  (18)  And  if  Satan  be  divided 
against  bimseli^  how  will  his  kingdom  stand  ?  since 
ye  say,  that  I  by  Beelzebub  cast  out  demons. 

19  (19)  And  if  I,  by  Beelzebub,  cast  out  demons,  by 
whom  do  your  sons  cast  [them]  out  ?    Therefore 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


■Sy. 
"Sy. 


130 


Sy.  entry,  hall. 


Sy.  scatter eth, 
to  scatter. 


^aj]%KrsJ 


oukmd. 


9By.\^^^M^ 


LUKE,   XL 

will  they  be  to  you  judges.    (20)  But  if  I,  by  the  20 
finger  of  God,  cast'  out  demons,  the  kingdom  of 
God  hath  come  near  to  you.    (21)   When  a  strong  21 
man  armed  keepeth  his  doorway,®  his  property 
rests  securely.    (22)  But  if  a  stronger  than -he  come  22 
and  overpower  him,  he  taketh  away  all  his  arms 
on  which  he  relied,  and  divideth  the  spoil  of  hinu 
(28)  He  that  is  not  for  me,  is  against  me;  and  he  23 
that  gathereth  not  with  me,  actually  scattereth.^ — 
(24)  An  unclean  spirit,  when  he  goeth  out  of  a  24 
man,  goeth  wandering  in  places  where  no  water  is, 
in  order  to  find  rest ;  and,  as  he  cannot  find  [it], 
he  saith:   I  will  return  to  my  habitation,  firom 
which  I  came.     (25)  And  when  he  cometh,  he  25 
findeth  it  swept  clean  and  set  in  order,    (26)  Then  26 
he  goeth  and  taketh  seven  other  spirits,  worse  than 
himsQlJ^  and  they  enter  in  and  dwell  there;  and 
the  last  state  of  that  man  is  worse  than  the  first — 
(27)  And  while  he  was  saying  these  things,  a  cer-  27 
tain  woman  fix)m  the  crowd,  lifted  up  her  voice, 
and  said  to  him :  Blessed  is  the  womb  that  carried 
thee,  and  the  bteasts  that  nursed  thee.    (28)  He  28 
said  to  her :  Blessed  are  they  who  hear  the  word 
of  God,  and  keep  it. — (29)  And  when  mxdtitudes  29 
were  assembled,  he  began  to  say :  This  evU  genera- 
tion seeketh  a  sign ;  and  no  sign  will  be  given  it, 
but  the  sign  of  Jonah  the  prophet.    (30)  For  as  30 
Jonah  was  a  sign  to  the  Ninevites,  so  also  will  the 
Son  of  man  be  a  sign  to  this  generation.    (31)  The  31 
queen  of  the  south®  will  stand  up  in  the  judgment 
with  the  men  of  this  generation,  and  will  condemn 
them;  for  she  came  firom  the  other  side  of  the 
earth,^  to  hear  the  wisdom  of  Solomon,  and  lo,  one 
superior  to  Solomon  is  here.    (32)  The  men  of  32 
Nmeveh  will  stand  up  in  the  judgment  with  this 
generation,  and  will  condemn  it;  for  they  repented 
at  the  preaching  of  Jonah,  and  lo,  one  superior  to 
Jonah  is  here.--{33)  No  one  lighteth  a  lamp,  and  38 
putteth  it  in  a  secret  place,  or  under  a  bushel,  but 
upon  a  liffht-stand ;  that  they  who  come  in,  may 
see  its  light.    (34)  The  lamp  of  thy  body  is  thy  34 
eye.     Therefore,  when  thy  eye  is  sound, «  thy 
whole  body  will  be  enlightened ;  but  if  it  be  baa, 
ihy  body  also  will  be  dark.    (35)  See  to  it,  there-  35 
Ebre,  lest  the  light  that  is  in  thee,  be  darkness, 
(86)  For  if  thy  whole  body  be  enlightened,  and  no  86 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  XL 

part  in  it  be  dark,  the  whole  will  be  luminous,  as 
if  a  lamp  ejilightened  thee  b^  its  radiance. 

87  And  while  be  was  speaking,  a  certain  Pharisee 
reauested  him  to  dine  with  him :  and  he  went  in, 

88  ana  reclined.  (38)  And  the  Pharisee  noticing  him, 
wondered  that  he  did  not  previously  baptize^*  before 

'89  dinner.  (89)  And  Jesus  said  to  him:  Now  je 
Pharisees  make  clean  the  exterior  of  the  cup  and 
the  dish ;  but  vour  interior  is  full  of  extortion  and 

40  wickedness.  (40)  Ye  deficient  in  understanding! 
did  not  he  who  made  the  exterior,  make  also  the 

41  interior?  (41 J  But,  give  ye  alms  from  what  ye 
possess ;  and  lo,  every  thing  will  be  clean  to  you. 

42  (42^  But  woe  to  you,  Pharisees  I  for  ye  tithe  mint 
ana  rue,  and  every  pot-herb ;  but  pass  over  justice^ 
and  the  love  of  God.    Now  ye  ought  to  do  these 

43  filings,  and  not  to  omit  those.  (43)  Woe  to  you, 
Pharisees!  who  love  the  chief  seats  in  the  syna* 

44  gogues,  and  a  salutation  in  the  streets.  (44)  Woe 
to  you.  Scribes  and  Pharisees,  hypocrites!  for  ye 
are  like  graves  that  are  unknown,  and  men  walk 

45  over  them  and  do  not  know  [it].  645)  And  one  of 
the  Scribes  replied,  and  said  to  nim:  Teacher,* 
while  saying  these  things,- thou  reproachest  us  also. 

46  (46)  And  he  said :  Woe  to  you  also !  ye  Scribes, 
who  lade  men  with  heavy  burdens;  yet  ye  your- 
selves will  not  touch  those  burdens  with  one  of 

47  your  lingers.  f47)  Woe  to  you!  who  build  the 
sepidchres  of  tne  prophets,  whom  your  fathers 

48  slew.  (48)  Thus  ve  testify,  that  ye  acquiesce  in 
the  deeds  of  your  mthers;  for  they  slew  them,  and 

49  ye  build  their  sepulchres.  (49)  Therefore  hath  wis- 
dom said :  Lo,  1  will  send  to  them  prophets  and 
l^ates  ;^  and  some  of  them  they  will  persecute  and 

50  slay;  (60)  that  from  this  generation  may  be  re- 
quired, the  blood  of  all  the  prophets,  which  hath 

61  been  died  since  the  world  was  created ;  (51)  from 
the  blood  of  Abel,  to  the  blood  of  Zacharidi  who 
was  slain  between  the  temple  and  the  altar.  Yea, 
say  I  to  you :  It  will  be  required  of  this  generation. 

52  (52)  Woe  to  you.  Scribes ;  for  ye  have  taken  away 
the  keys  of  knowledge  :  ye  youiaelves  enter  noL 

58  and  them  that  are  entering  ye  hinder. — (53)  And 
when  he  had  said  these  things  to  them,  the  Scribes 
and  Pharisees  began  to  be  offended,  and  became 

54  angry,  and  carped  at  his  discourses  (54)  and  prao- 


131 


^8j.^ 


Sy.U-l 


'^S7.]l<>t\SD 


>  Sy.  l^/iN^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


132 


LUKE,   XIL 


Sj. 


St. 


narius. 


0T9  hlaspheme. 


fXf  parable. 


tised  many  wiles  upon  hiniy  seeking  to  catch  some- 
thing from  his  lips,m  that  they  mignt  accuse  him. 

And  when  great  multitudes  were  assembled  by  XII. 
myriads,  so  that  they  trod  one  upon  another,  Jesus 
began  to  say  to  his  discioles :   First  of  all,  beware 
for  yourselves  of  that  leaven  of  the  Pharisees, 
which  is  hypocrisy.     (2)   For  there  is  nothing    2 
hidden,  which  will  not  be  revealed ;  nor  concealed, 
that  will  not  be  known.     (8)  For  whatever  ye    8 
speak  in  the  dark,  will  be  heard  in  the  light ;  and 
what  in  secret  chambers,  ve  whisper  in  the  ear,» 
will  be  proclaimed  on  the  house-tops.    (4)  And  to    4 
vou,  my  friends,  I  say :  Be  not  afraid  of  them  that 
kill  the  body,  and  afterwards  have  nothing  more 
they  can  do.    (5)  But  I  will  show  you,  of  whom    6 
to  be  afraid :   of  him  who,  after  he  hath  killed, 
hath  authority  to  cast  into  heU.^    Yea,  say  I  to 
you :  be  afraid  of  him.    (6)  Are  not  five  sparrows    6 
sold  for  two  assarii  ?«    and  not   one  of  them  is 
forgotten  before  God.    (7)  And  as  for  you,  the    7 
very  hairs  of  your  head  are  all  numbered.    Fear 
not,  therefore ;  for  ye  are  superior  to  many  sparrows. 
(8)  And  I  say  to  you,  that  every  one  that  shall    8 
confess  me  before  men,  the  Son  of  man  will  also 
confess  him  before  the  angels  of  God.    (9)  But  he    9 
that  shall  deny  me  before  men,  shall  himself  be 
denied  before  the  angels  of  God.    (10)  And  eveiy  10 
one  that  shall  speak  a  word  against  the  Son  of 
man,  it  shall  be  forgiven  him :   but  he  that  shall 
reproach^  the  Holy  Spirit,  it  will  not  be  forgiven 
him.     (11)  And  when  they  shall  bring  you  into  11 
the  synagogues,  before  chiefe  and  men  in  authority, 
be  not  anxious  how  ye  shall  make  defence,  or  what 
ve  shall  say ;  (12)  for  the  Holy  Spirit  will,  in  that  12 
nour,  instruct  you  what  to  say. 

And  one  of  the  assembly  said  to  him :   Teacher,  18 
tell  inv  brother,  to  divide  the  inheritance  with  me. 
(14)  But  Jesus  said  to  him :  Man,  who  established  14 
me  a  judge  and  distributor  over  you  ?    (15)  And  15 
he  said  to  his  disciples :  Beware  of  all  avarice,  for 
life®  consisteth  not  in  abundance  of  riches.    (16J  16 
And  he  spoke  to  them  a  similitude  'J  The  land  01 
a  certain  rich  man    brought    forth    produce  ip 
abundance.    (17)  And  he  considered  with  himself  17 
and  said:  What  shall  I  do ;  for  I  have  not  where 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XIL 


188 


Sy. 


^QOj 


18  I  c»n  store  up  my  produce  ?  (18)  And  he  said : 
This  will  I  do ;  I  will  pull  down  my  storehouses, 
and  build  them  larger ;  and  there  will  I  store  up 

19  all  my  corn  and  my  good  things :  (19)  and  I  will 
say  to  my  soul :   My  soul,?  thou  hast  good  things  t  Sy. 
in  abundance,  which  are  stored  up  for  many  years; 
take  thy  ease;   eat,  drink,  and  live  in  pleasure. 

20  (20)  But  God  said  to  him:  Thou  void  of  reason! 
This  night,  thv  soul  will  be  required  of  thee ;  and 
to  whom  will  belong  these  tilings  provided  by 

21  thee  ?  (21)  Such  is  he  that  layeth  up  treasures  for 
himself  and  is  not  rich  in  God. 

22  And  he  said  to  his  disciples :  Therefore  I  tell 
you,  Be  not  anxious  for  your  life,^»  what  ye  shall 
eat;  nor  for  your  body,  what  ye  shall  put  on. 

28  (28)  For  the  life>  is  more  important  than  food,  and 

24  the  body  than  raiment  (24)  Consider  the  ravens, 
which  sow  not,  nor  reap,  nor  nave  cellars  and  store- 
houses; yet  God  provideth  them  food.  How 
much  more  important  now  are  ye,  than  the  birds  I 

25  (25)  And  which  of  you,  by  taking  pains,  can  add 

26  one  cubit  to  his  stature  ?  (26)  And  if  ye  are  im- 
potent for  that  which  is  least,  why  are  ye  anxious 

27  about  the  rest  ?  (27)  Consider  the  lilies,  how  they 
grow :  they  toil  not,  nor  do  they  spin.  Yet  I  say 
to  you,  tliat  not  even  Solomon  in  all  his  glory, 

28  was  clothed  like  one  of  these.  (28)  And  if  God 
so  clothe  the  herb,  which  to-day  exists  in  the 
field,  and  to-morrow  &lls  into  the  oven,  how  much 

29  more  you,  ye  little  in  fidth  ?  (29)  And  inquire  not, 
what  ye  shall  eat,  or  what  ye  shall  drink ;  nor  let 

80  your  mind  wander  upon  these  things.  (30)  For 
all  these  things  the  people  of  the  world  seek  after ; 
and  your  father  knoweth  that,  for  you  also,  these 

81  things  are  needful.  (31)  But  seek  ye  the  kingdom 
of  God,  and  all  these  things  will  be  added  to  you. 

82  (32)  Fear  not,  little  flock ;  for  your  Father  is  dis- 
88  posed  to  give  you  the  kingdom.    (33)  Sell  your 

Eroperty,   and  give  alms:    make  for  yourselves 
ags  that  do  not  become  old,  and  a  treasure  that 
is  not  transient,  in  the  heavens ;   where  no  thief 

84  approacheth,  and  no  moth  eateth.  (34)  For 
where  your  treasure  is,  there  also  will  your  heart 

85  be.     (85)  Let  your  loins  be  girded,   and  your 

86  lamps  burning.  (36)  And  be  ye  like  persons  who 
are  waiting  K>r  their  lord,  when  he  shall  return 


\^y\ 


Sy.  ).jLj2iJ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


134 


LUKE,   XU 


k  Gr.  Peter. 


^  Sy.  to  casL 


39 


40 


ftom  the  house  of  feastingi  that,  when  he  shall 
come  and  knock,  they  may  open  to  him  immedi- 
ately.     (87)    Happy  are  those  servants,   whom  87 
their  lord,  when  he  cometh,  shall  find  so  doing. 
Verily  I  say  to  you :   He  will  gird  his  loins,  and 
make  them  recline,  and  will  pass  around  and  serve 
l^em.    (88)  And  if  in  the  second  watch,  or  in  the  38 
third,  he  shall  come  and  so  find  [them],  happy  are 
those  servants.    (39)  And  this  know  ye,  that  if 
the  lord  of  the  house  had  known  at  what  watch 
the  thief  woidd  come,  he  would  have  been  awake, 
and  would  not  have  suffered  his  house  to  be 
broken  into.    (40)  Therefore  be  ye  also  ready; 
for  at  an  hour  mat  ye  think  not,  the  Son  of  man 
cometh.    (41)  Simon  Cephas^  saith  to  him :  Our  41 
Lord,  speakest  thou  this  similitude  to  us,  or  also  to 
all  men?  (42)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Who  then  is  42 
that  faithful  and  wise  steward,  whom  his  lord  will 
place  over  all  his  domestics,  to  give  them  their 
portion  in  due  time  ?  (43)  Happy  is  that  servant  48 
whom  his  lord,  when  he  cometn,  shall  find  so 
doing.    (44)  Verily  I  say  to  you :   He  will  place  44 
him  over  all  his  possessions.     (45)   But  if  that  45 
servant  shall  say  in  his  heart.  My  lord  delayeth 
his  coming;  and  shall  begin  to  smite  the  servants 
and  the  maidens  of  his  lord;  and  shall  begin  to 
eat  and  to  drink  and  be  drunk;  (46)  the  lord  of  46 
that  servant  will  come  in  a  day  he  thinketh  not, 
and  in  an  hour  he  knoweth  not,  and  will  cut  him 
in  two ;  and  will  assign  him  his  portion  with  them 
that  are  unfaithful    (47)   And  the  servant  that  47 
knew  his  lord's  pleasure,  and  did  not  prepare  for 
him  according  to  his  pleasure,  shall  be  beaten  with 
many  [stripes].    (48)  But  he  that  knew  not,  yet  48 
did  that  wnich  deserved  stripes,  shall  be  beaten 
with  few  stripes.    For  to  wnomsoever  much  is 
given,  from  hmi  will  much  be  required ;  and  to 
whom   much   is  committed,   the    more  will   be 
required  at  his  hand. — (49)    I  have  come  to  cast  49 
fire  on  the  earth;  and  I  would,  that  it  already 
burned.    (50)  And  I  have  a  baptism^  to  be  bap-  50 
tized°>  with ;  and  I  am  much  pressed  until  it  be 
accomplished.    (51)  Suppose  ye,  that  I  have  come  51 
to  produce^  tranqmllity  on  the  earth?  I  tell  you, 
No :  but  division.    (52)  For  from  this  time,  there  52 
will  be  five  [persons]  m  one  house,  who  will  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  XIIL 


186 


divided,  three  against  two,  and  two  a^nst  three. 

68  (68^  For  a  father  will  be  divided  against  his  son, 
ana  a  son  against  his  &ther;  a  mother  against  her 
daughter,  and  a  daughter  against  her  mother:  a 
mother-in-law  against  her  (mu^hter-in-law,  and  a 
daughter-in-law  against  her  motner-in-law. 

64  And  he  said  to  the  multitudes :  When  you  see 
a  doud  rising  out  of  the  west,  ye  at  once  say: 

66  Bain  is  coming ;  and  it  is  so.  (65^  And  when  a 
south  wind  bloweth,  ye  say:  It  will  be  hot:  and 

66  it  is  so.  (56)  Ye  hypocrites,  ye  know  how  to 
distinguish  the  aspect  of  the  neavens  and  the 
earth ;  and  why  can  ye  not  distinguish  the  present 

67  time?  (57)  And  why  do  ye  no^  of  yourselves, 

58  judge  correctly  ?o — (58)  And  when  thou  goest 
with  thy  adversaryp  to  the  ruler,'  while  on  the 
way,  make  eifort  to  be  released  bv  him ;  lest  he 
brinff  thee  to  the  judge,  and  the  judge  deliver  thee 
to  the  exactor,  and  the  exactor  cast  thee  into 

59  prison.  (59)  For  verily  I  say  to  thee :  Thou  wilt 
not  come  out  thence,  until  thou  pay  the  last  mite.* 

XTTT.  And  at  that  time,  some  came  and  told  him  of 
those  Galileans,  whose  blood  Pilate  had  mingled 
2  with  their  sacrifices.  (2)  And  Jesus  replied,  and 
said  to  them:  Suppose  ye,  that  these  Galileans 
were  sinners  beyond  all  the  Gleans,  because  this 
8  occurred  to  them?  (3^  No.  And  I  say  to  you, 
That  all  of  you  also,  unless  ye  repent,  will  likewise 

4  perish.  (4)  Or  those  eighteen,  on  whom  the  tower 
m  Siloam*  fell,  and  slew  them,  suppose  ye,  that 
they  were  sinners  beyond  all  the  men  innabiting 

5  Jerusalem?  (5)  No.  And  I  say  to  you.  That  ex- 
cept ye  repent,  ye  like  them  will  all  of  you  perish. 

6  —(3)  ^^d  he  spoke  this  similitude :  A  man  had  a 
fig-tree  that  was  planted  in  his  vineyard :  and  he 
came,   seeking  mdts  upon  it,   and  found  none. 

7  (7)  And  he  said  to  the  cultivator :  Lo,  these  three 
years,  I  have  come  seeking  fruits  on  this  fig-tree, 
and  I  find  none.     Cut  it  down:  why  should  it 

8  cumber  the  ground?  (8)  The  cultivator  said  to 
him :  My  Lord,  spare  it  this  year  also,  until  I  shall 

9  work  about  it,  and  manure  it.  (9)  And  if  it  bear 
fruits,  [well ;]  and  if  not,  thou  wilt  cut  it  down : 
why  shoxdd  it  live? 

10      And  when  Jesus  was  teaching  in  one  of  the 


o  Sy.  truth. 
P  or,  prosecutor. 


'  Sy.  ]jQla« 


•Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


186 


LUKE,   XliL 


•-Sy.O} 


'  Sy.  to  drivk, 
'Sjr. 


Sy. 


^.^Jlco 


Sy  ^V^> 


synagogues,  on  the  sabbath,  fll)  a  woman  was  there,  11 
who  had  had  a  spirit  of  innrmity  eighteen  years; 
and  she  was  bent  over,  and  could  not  straighten 
herself  at  all.    (12)  And  Jesus  saw  her,  and  called  12 
her,  and  said  to  her:  Woman,  thou  art  released 
from  thy  infirmity.     (18)  And  he  put  his  hand  18 
upon  her;  and  immediately  she  straightened  her- 
self up,  and  glorified  God.     (14)  And  the  chief**  of  14 
the  synagogue,  being  angry  that  Jesus  had  healed 
on  the  sabbath,  answered,  and  said  to  the  multi- 
tude :  There  are  six  days,  on  which  it  is  lawfiil  to 
work ;  on  them  come  ye,  and  be  healed,  and  not 
on  the  sabbath  day.    (15)  But  Jesus  replied,  and  15 
said  to  him :  Thou  hypocrite  I  Doth  not  every  one 
of  you,  on  the  sabbath,  loose  his  ox  or  his  ass  from 
the  stall,  and  lead  him  to  water ?<^    (16)  And  this  16 
woman,  a  daughter  of  Abraham,  whom  the  Ca- 
lumniator^  hath  bound,  lo,  these  eighteen  years, 
ought  she  not  to  be  loosed  from  this  bond  on  the 
sabbath  day?    (17)  And  when  he  had  said  these  17 
things,  all  those  that  stood  up  against  him  were 
ashamed:  and  all  the  people  rejoiced  in  all  the 
miracles®    that    were   wrought    by   his    hand. — 
(18)  And  Jesus  said :  To  what  is  the  kingdom  of  18 
God  like?  and  with  what  shall  I  compare  it? 
(19^  It  is  like  a  grain  of  mustard,  which  a  man  19 
took  and  cast  into  his  garden;  and  it  grew,  and 
became  a  large  tree ;  and  a  bird  of  heaven  made 
her  nest  in  its  branches.    (20)  Jesus  said  again:  20 
With  what  shall  I  compare  the  kingdom  of  God? 
(21)  It  is  like  leaven,  which  a  woman  took  and  21 
hid  in  three  seahs^  of  meal,  until  the  whole  was 
fermented. 

And  he  travelled  through  the  villages  and  citie&  22 
teaching  and  going  toward  Jerusalem.    (28)  And  28 
a   person    asked   him,   whether   they  were  few, 
who  would  have  life??    (24)  And  Jesus  said  to  24 
them :  Strive  to  enter  the  narrow  gate :  for  I  say 
to  you,  many  will  seek  to  enter,  and  will  not  l>e 
able.    (25)   From  the  time  that  the  lord  of  the  25 
house  shall  rise  and  close  the  door,  then  ye  will 
stand  without,  and  knock  at  the  door ;  and  ye  will 
begin  to  say:  Our  Lord,  our  Lord,  open  to  us; 
and  he  will  answer,  and  say :  I  tell  you,  I  know 
you  not,  whence  ye  are.    (26)  And  ye  will  begin  26 
to  say :  We  have  eaten  ana  drunken  before  thee ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,    XIV. 


187 


27  and  thou  hast  taught  in  our  streets.  (27)  And  he 
will  say  to  you:  1  know  you  not,  whence  ye  are: 

28  depart  from  me,  ye  doers  of  felsehood.  (28)  There 
will  be  weeping  and  gashing  of  teeth,  when  ye 
will  see  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob,  and  all 
the  prophets,  in  the  kingdom  of  God;  and  your- 

29  selves  will  be  thrust  out  (29)  And  they  will 
come  from  the  east  and  from  the  west,  ana  from 
the  south  and  from  the  north,  and  will  recline  in 

80  the  kingdom  of  God.  (30)  And  lo,  there  are  last 
that  wm  be  first,  and  tiiere  are  first  that  will  be 
last. 

81  On  the  same  day  came  some  of  the  Pharisees, 
and  said  to  him:   Go,  depart  hence;  for  Herod 

82  purposeth  to  kill  thee.  (32)  Jesus  said  to  them: 
u^o  ye  and  tell  that  fox.  Behold,  I  cast  out  demons 
and  perform  cures,  to-day  and  to-morrow,  and  on 

38  the  third  day  I  shall  be  consummated.  (33)  But  I 
must  labor  to-dav  and  to-morrow,  and  on  the  fol- 
lowing day  I  will  go ;  because  it  cannot  be,  that  a 
prophet  snould  perish  away  from  Jerusalem. — 

34  (34)  0  Jerusalem,  Jerusalem,  that  killest  the  pro- 
phets, and  stonest  them  that  are  sent  to  thee; 
now  many  times  would  I  have  gathered  thy  chil- 
dren, as  a  hen  that  gathereth  ner  young  under 

S5  her  wings,  and  ye  womd  not?  (35)  Behold,  your 
house  is  left  to  you  desolate.  For  I  say  to  you: 
Ye  will  not  see  me,  until  ye  will  say.  Blessed  is  he 
that  Cometh  in  the  name  of  the  Lord. 

XIV.  And  it  occurred,  that,  as  he  entered  the 
house  of  one  of  the  chief  Pharisees  to  eat  bread 

2  on  the  sabbath  day,  they  watched  him.    (2)    And 

8  lo,  a  dropsical*  man  was  before  him.  (3)  And 
Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  the  Scribes  and  Phari- 

4  sees :  Is  it  lawftd  to  heal  on  the  sabbath  ?  (4^  And 
they  were  silent.    And  he  took  him,  and  nealed 

6  him,  and  dismissed  him.  (6)  And  be  said  to  them: 
Which  of  you,  if  his  son  or  his  ox  fall  into  a  pit 
on  the  sabbath  day,  doth  not  immediately  lift  and 

6  draw  him  out?    (6)  And  they  could  give  him  no 

7  answer  to  that.— (v)  And  he  spoke  a  similitude 
to  the  guests  that  were  present,  as  he  noticed  how 

8  they  chose  places  on  the  highest  couches.  (8]  When 
thou  art  invited  by  any  one  to  a  house  cf  leasting, 
go  not  and  recline  on  the  highest  couch  \  lest  there 


»   Sy.  who  had 
collected  water 


Digitized  by 


Google 


138 


LUKE,  XIV. 


should  be  invited  there,  one  more  honorable  than 
thou ;  (9)  and  he  that  invited  both  him  and  thee,     9 
come  and  say  to  thee,  Give  place  to  this  man; 
and  thou  be  ashamed,  when  thou  risest,  and  takest 
a  lower  couch.     (10)  But  when  thou  art  invi-  10 
ted,  go  and  recline  on  the  lowest  [couch];  that 
when  he  who  invited  thee  come,  he  may  say  to 
thee:   My  friend,   come  up  higher  and  recline. 
And  thou  wilt  have  honor,  before  all  that  recline 
with  thee.    (11)  For,  every  one  that  exalteth  him-  11 
sel^  will  be  humbled :  and  everv  one  that  hum- 
bleth  himself  will  be  exalted.— {12)  And  he  said  12 
to  him  that  invited  him:  When  thou  makest  a 
dinner  or  a  supper,  invite  not  thy  friends,  nor  thy 
brothers,  nor  thy  relatives,  nor  thy  rich  neigh- 
bors; lest  they  also  invite  thee,  and  thou  have 
this  recompense.    (13)  But  when  thou  makest  a  13 
feast,  invite  the  poor,  the  maimed,  the  lame,  the 
blind.    (14)  And  thou  wilt  be  blessed.    For  they  14 
cannot  recompense  thee ;  but  thy  recompense  wUl 
be  at  the  resurrection  of  the  just. — (15)  And  when  15 
one  of  those  reclining  heard  these  tlunga^  he  said  to 
him :  Blessed  is  he  that  shall  eat  bread  in  the  king- 
dom of  God.    (16)  Jesus  said  to  him:  A  certain  16 
man   made   a  great   supper,    and  invited  many. 
(17)  And  at  the  time  for  supper,  he  sent  his  ser-  17 
vant  to  say  to  those  invited:  Lo,  every  thing  is 
ready  for  you ;  come.    (18)  And  they  all  to  a  man,  18 
began  to  excuse  themselves.     The  firat  said  to  him : 
I  have  bought  a  field,  and  am  constrained  to  go  out 
and  see  it.    I  pray  thee,  allow  me  to  be  excused. 
(19)  Another  said:  I  have  bought  five  yoke  of  19 
oxen,  and  I  go  to  inspect  them.    I  pray  iJiee,  allow 
me  to  be  excused.    (20)  Another  said:  I  have  20 
married  a  wife,  and  on  this  account  I  cannot  come. 
(21)  And  the  servant  came,  and  told  his  lord  these  21 
things.    Then  the  lord  of  the  house  was  angry : 
and  he  said  to  his  servant.  Go  out  quickly  into  tne 
market-places  and  streets  of  the  city,  and  bring  in 
hither  the  poor,  and  the  diseased,  and  the  lame, 
and  the  blind.    (22)  And  the  servant  said:  My  22 
lord,  it  is  done  as  thou  commandedst;  and  stiU 
there  is  room.     (23)  And  the  lord  said  to  his  ser-  23 
vant:   Go  out  to  the  by-paths,  and  among  the 
hedges,  and  constrain  them  to  come  in ;  that  my 
house  may  be  filled.    (24)  For  I  declare  to  you,  24 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XV. 


189 


'  Sy.  arUkJZLS 


that  not  one  of  those  men  that  were  invited,  shall 
taste  of  my  supper. 
26      And  when  great  mxdtitudes  were  travelling  with 

26  him,  he  turnea  himself  and  said  to  them :  (26)  He 
that  Cometh  to  me,  and  hateth  not  his  father  and 
his  mother,  and  his  brothers  and  his  sisters,  and 
his  wife  and  his  children,  and  his  own  life**  also, 

27  cannot  become  a  disciple  to  me.  (27)  And  he  that 
doth  not  take  up  his  cross  and  come  after  me,  can- 

28  not  become  a  disciple  to  me.  (28)  For,  which  of 
you,  wishing  to  build  a  tower,  doth  not  first  sit 
down  and  compute  the  expense,  whether  he  have 

29  the  means  to  complete  it?  {29)  lest>  when  he  hath 
laid  the  foundation,  and  is  unaole  to  finish,  all  that 

80  see  it  begin  to  deride  him;  (80)  and  say:  This 
man  began  to  build,  and  was  unable  to  finish. 

81  (81)  Or  what  king,  that  is  going  to  contend  in  bat- 
tle with  his  neighbor  king,  doth  not  first  consider, 
whether  he  is  able,  with  ten  thousand,  to  meet  him 
that  is  coming  against  him  with  twen^  thousand  ? 

82  (32)  and  if  not ;  while  he  is  yet  far  irom  him,  he 

83  sendeth  envoys,  and  sueth  for  peace.  (SS)  So 
every  one  of  you  who  doth  not  give  up  all  his 

84  possessions,  cannot  be  my  disciple. — 184)  Salt  is  a 
good  thing:  but  if  the  salt  itself  hath  become  in* 

86  sipid,  wherewith  shall  it  be  salted  ?  (86)  It  is  fit<^ 
for  neither  the  earth,  nor  the  dunghiU.  They  cast 
it  away. — ^He  that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear. 

KY .    And  pubUcans  and  sinners  csmie  to  him,  to  hear 
2  him.    (2)  And  the  Scribes  and  Pharisees  mur- 
mured, and  said :  This  man  receiveth  sinners,  and 
8  eateth  with  them.    (8)  And  Jesus  spoke  to  them 

4  this  similitude: a  (4)  What  man  wnong  you,  that'  or, parable, 
hath  a  hundred  sheep,  if  he  lose  one  of  them,  doth 
not  leave  the  ninety  and  nine  in  the  desert,  and  go 
and  seek  for  that  which  is  lost,  until  he  find  it? 

5  (5)  And  when  he  findeth  it,   he  rejoiceth,  and 

6  taketh  it  upon  his  shoulders;  (6)  and  he  cometh 
home,  and  he  calleth  together  his  friends  and 
neighbors,  and  saith  to  them:  Rejoice  with  me; 

7  for  I  have  found  my  sheep  that  was  lost.  (7)  I 
say  to  you,  that  there  will  thus  be  joy  in  heaven, 
over  one  sinner  that  repenteth,  more  than  over 
ninety  and  nine  just  ones,  to  whom  repentance  waa 

8  not  neoeasary. — (8)  Or  what  woman  is  there,  who, 


*  S  J.  goei  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


140 


LUKE,    XV. 


(XI  a  ^  1  ZcA 


*  Sy.  «Aoe  Aim. 


if  she  have  ten  drachmas,  and  lose  one  of  them, 
doth  not  light  a  lamp,  and  sweep  the  house,  and 
search  for  it  carefully,  until  she  find  it?    (9)  And    9 
when  she  hath  found  it,  she  calleth  together  her 
Mends  and  neighbors,  and  saith  to  them:   Bejoice 
with  me,  for  I  have  found  my  drachma  that  was 
lost    (10)  I  say  to  you,  That  there  will  thus  be  10 
joy,  before  the  angels  of  God,  over  one  sinner 
thiat  repenteth. — (11)  And   Jesus   said   to  them  11 
again:   A  certain  man  had  two  sons.    (12)  And  12 
ms  younger  son  said  to  him :  My  father,  give  me 
the  portion  that  falleth  to  me  fix)m  thy  house. 
And  he  divided  to  them  his  property.     (13)  And  18 
after  a  few  days,  the  younger  son  collected  together 
all  that  fell  to  him,  and  went  to  a  distant  place ; 
and  there  squandered  his  property,  by  livmg  in 
dissipation.    (14)  And  when  he  had  consumed  all  14 
that  he  had,  tnere  occurred  a  great  famine  in  that 
place ;  and  he  began  to  be  in  want.     (15)  And  he  15 
went  and  connected  himself  with  one  of  the  citi- 
zens^ of  that  place :  and  he  sent  him  into  the  field, 
to  tend  swine.     (16)  And  he  longed  to  fill  his  belly  16 
with  those  pods  wnich  the  swine  ate :  and  no  one 
gave  to  him.    (17)  And  when  he  came  to  himself, <*  17 
he  said :  How  many  hired  servants  are  now  at  my 
father's  house,  who  have  bread  enough,  and  I  am 
here  perishing  with  hunger.    (18)  I  will  arise  and  18 
go  to  my  father,  and  say  to  him:  My  father,  I 
have  sinned    against    heaven,   and  before  thee; 
(19J  and  am  no  longer  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son.  19 
Make  me  like  one  of  thy  hired  servants.    (20)  And  20 
he  arose  and  went  towards  his  father.     And  he 
was  yet  at  a  distance,  when  his  father  saw  him ;     v 
and  he  pitied  him,  and  ran,  and  fell  upon  his  neck, 
and  kissed  him.    (21)  And  his  son  said  to  him :  21 
My  father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven,  and  be- 
fore thee,  and  am  not  worthy  to  be  called  thy  son. 
(22)  But  hi3  father  said  to  his  servants:  ^ring  22 
forth  the  best  robe,  and  clothe  him,  and  put  a 
ring  on  his  hand,  and  supply^  him  with  shoes. 
(23^  And  bring  forth  and  slay  the  fatted  bullock;  28 
and  let  us  eat,  and  be  merry.    (24)  For,  this  mj  24 
son  was  dead,  and  is  alive;  he  was  lost  and  is 
found.    And  the^  began  to  be  merry.    (25)  But  26 
his  elder  son  was  in  the  field;  and  as  he  came  and 
'drew  near  to  the  house,  he  heard  the  sound  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XVL 


Ul 


26  singiiig  of  many.    (26)  And  he  called  to  one  of 

27  the  boys,  and  asked  him  what  it  meant  (27)  And 
he  said  to  him :  Thy  brother  hath  come ;  and  thy 
&ther  hath  killed  the  fatted  bullock,  because  he 

28  hath  received  him  in  health.  (28)  And  he  was 
angry,  and  would  not  go  in:  and  his  father  went 

29  out  and  entreated  him.  (29^  And  he  said  to  his 
father :  Lo,  these  many  years  nave  I  labored  in  thy 
service,  and  never  transgressed  thy  command ;  and 
thou  never  gavest  me  a  kid,  that  I  might  make 

80  merry  with  my  friends.  (80)  But  for  this  thy  son, 
when  he  had  dissipated  tny  property  with  harlots, 
and  came  jThome],  thou  hast  slain  the  fetted  bul- 

51  lock  for  lum.  (31)  His  father  said  to  him:  My 
son,  thou  hast  been  ever  with  me,  and  all  that  I 

52  have,  is  thine.  (32)  But  it  was  proper  for  us  to 
be  merry,  and  to  rejoice ;  because  this  thj  brother 
was  dead,  and  is  alive ;  he  was  lost,  and  is  found. 

XVL  And  he  spoke  a  parable  to  his  disciples.  There 
was  a  certain  rich  man,  who  had  a  steward ;  and 
accusations  were  brought  to  him  of  him,  that  he 

2  s(juandered  his  property.  (2)  And  his  lord  called 
him,  and  said  to  him :  what  is  this  that  I  hear  of 
thee?  Bender  to  me  an  account  of  thy  steward- 
ship;  for  thou  canst  no  longer  be  my  steward. 

3  (8)  And  the  steward  said  with  himself:  What 
shall  I  do,  since  my  lord  is  about  to  take  from  me 
the  stewardship?    To  dig,  I  am  unable;  and  to 

4  become  a  beggar,  I  am  ashamed.  (4)  I  know  what 
to  do,  that,  when  I  am  put  out  of  the  stewardship, 

5  they  may  receive  me  to  their  houses.  (5)  And  he 
called  each  one  of  his  lord's  debtors ;  and  he  said 
to  the  first.  How  much  owest  thou  to  my  lord? 

6  (6)  And  he  said  to  him,  One  hundred  measures*  of 
oil.     And  he  said  to  him :  Take  thy  bill,  and  sit 

7  down  quickly,  and  write  Fifty  measures.  (7)  And 
he  said  to  another:  And  how  much  owest  tnou  to 
nav  lord  ?  And  he  said  to  him,  One  hundred  cors^ 
01  wheat.     And  he  said  to  him :  Take  thy  bill,  and 

8  sit  down,  and  write  Eighty  cors.  (8)  And  our  Lord 
praised  the  imrighteous  steward,  for  having  acted 
sagaciously :  for  the  children  of  this  world  are  more 
sagacious  than  the  children  of  light,  in  this  their 

9  generation.  (9)  And  I  also  say  to  you :  Make  to 
yourselves  friends,  with  this  unrighteous  mammon  ;^ 


*  Sy.  ^i^ 
Gr.  jxsrp^rai. 


^  Sy.  ^»QO 


«Sy.  ^JOSfi&C 


Digitized  by 


Google 


142 


LUKE,   XVL 


*  or,  the  truth. 


•Sy.  <i,high. 


'Sy.  pJi 


«Sy.|ociL 


so  that  when  it  is  finished,  they  may  receive  you 
to  their  everlasting  tabernacles.    (10)  He  that  is  10 
fiuthful  in  the  little,  is  also  faithful  in  the  much; 
and  he  that  is  unjust  in  the  little,  is  also  unjust  in 
tiie  much.    Ql)  If  therefore  ye  have  not  been  11 
fiuthful  in  the  unrighteous  mammon,  who  will 
intrust  to  you  the  reality  ?d    (12)  And  if  ye  have  12 
not  been   found  fidthful   in    that  which  is  not 
yours,  who  will  give  to  you  that  which  is  yours? 
(18)  There  is  no  servant,  who  can  serve  two  lords.  18 
For,  either  he  will  hate  tiie  one  and  love  the  other, 
or  he  will  honor  the  one  and  despise  the  other. 
Ye  cannot  serve  God  and  mwumon. 

And  the  Pharisees,  when  they  heard  all  these  14 
things,  because  they  loved  money,  derided  him. 
(16)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Ye  are  such  as  jus-  15 
tify  yourselves  before  men;  but  God  knoweth 
your  heart:  for  that  which  is  exalted^  among  men, 
IS  abominable  before  God.    (16)  The  law  and  the  16 
prophets  were  until  John :  since  then,  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  proclaimed,  and  every  one  presseth  it  to 
enter  in.    (17)  And  it  is  easier  for  heaven  and  17 
earth  to  pass  away,  than  for  one  letter  to  pass  from 
the  law. — (18)  Whoever  putteth  awav  his  wife,  18 
and  taketh  another,   committeth  adultery;    and 
whoever  taketh  her  that  is  put  away,  committeth 
adultery.— (19^  And  there  was  a  certain  rich  man.  19 
who  was  clotned  in  fine  linen  and  scarlet,   ana 
passed  every  day  in  splendid  luxury.    (20)  And  20 
there  was  a  certain  poor  man,  whose  name  was 
Lazarus  ;^  and  he  was  laid  at  the  gate  of  the  rich 
man,  smitten  with  ulcers.    (21)  And  he  desired  to  21 
fill  his  belly  with  the  firagments  that  fell  firom  the 
rich  man's  table:  and  the  dogs  also  came  and 
licked  his  ulcers.    (22)  And  so  it  was,  .that  the  22 
poor  man  died;  and  angels  transported  him  to 
Abraham's  bosom.?    The  rich  man  also  died,  and 
was  buried.    (28)  And  being  tormented  in  hell,^  23 
he  raised  his  eyes  firom  afar  of^  and  saw  Abraham, 
and  Lazarus  in  his  bosom.    (24)  And  he  called  with  24 
a  loud  voice,  and  said:  Abraham,  my  father,  have 
pity  on  me ;  and  send  Lazarus,  that  he  may  dip  the 
tip  of  his  finger  in  water,  tod  moisten  my  tongue ; 
for,  lo,  I  am  tormented  in  this  flame.    (25)  Ana  25 
Abraham  said  to  him:  My  son,  remember,  that 
thou  receivedst  thy  good  things  in  thy  lifetimei 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XVIL 


143 


and  Lazaros  liis  evil  things:  and  now,  behold,  he 

26  is  here  at  rest,  and  thou  art  tormented.  (26)  And 
with  all  these,  there  is  a  great  barrieri  between  us 
and  you;  so  that  they  who  would  pass  from  here 
to  you,  cannot;  neither  [can  they]  pass  from  there 

27  to  us.  (27)  He  said  to  him:  I  pray  thee,  Aere- 
fore,  my  &ther,  that  thou  wouldst  send  him  to  my 

28  Other's  house;  (28)  for  I  have  five  brothers;  that 
he  may  go  and  protest  to  them ;  lest  they  also  come 

29  to  this  place  of  torment  (29)  Abrahimi  said  to 
him:  They  have  Moses  and  the  prophets,  let  them 

80  hear  them.  (80)  But  he  said  to  him:  No,  my 
fitther  Abraham :  but  if  one  shall  go  to  them  from 

81  the  dead,  they  will  repent  (31)  Abraham  said  to 
him:  If  they  hear  not  Moses  and  the  prophets, 
they  will  not  believe,  though  one  should  rise  from 
the  dead. 


2 


8 


5 
6 


Sj.llOAfiD 


XVlL  And  Jesus  said  to  his  disciples :  It  cannot  be, 
but  that  offences*  will  come :  but  woe  to  him,  by 
whom  they  come.  (2)  Better  for  him  were  it,  if  a 
millstone  were  suspended  to  his  neck,  and  he  cast 
into  the  sea,  than  that  he  should  cause  one  of  these 
little  ones  to  stumble.  (8)  Take  heed  to  your- 
selves.— ^If  thy  brolJier  transgress,  rebuke  him; 
and  if  he  repent^  forgive  him.  (4)  And  if  he  shall 
offend  against  thee  seven  times  in  a  dav,  and,  seven 
times  in  a  day,  shall  turn  himself  to  thee,  and  say. 
I  repent;  forgive  him. — (5)  And  the  Legttes**  saia 
to  our  Lord:  Increase  our  &ith.  (6)  Me  said  to 
them:  If  ye  had  &ith  like  a  grain  of  mustard  seed, 
ye  might  say  to  this  mulberry-tree.  Be  thou  torn 
up  by  the  roots,  and  be  thou  planted  in  the  sea; 

7  and  itwoxdd  obey  you.— {TJ  which  of  you,  having 
a  servant  driving  a  yoke  or  oxen,  or  tending  sheep, 
will  say  to  him  when  he  cometh  from  the  field, 

8  Pass  on  at  once,  and  recline  for  supper?  (8)  But 
he  will  say  to  him :  Prepare  for  me  what  I  may 
sup  upon,  and  gird  thy  loins  and  serve  me,  until  I 
have  eaten  and  drunken ;  and  afterwards  thou  shalt 
eat  and  drink.  (9)  Hath  he  thanks  for  him,  be- 
cause the  servant  did  what  was  commanded  him? 
I  think  not.  (10)  So  also  ye,  when  ye  have  done 
all  the  things  commanded  you,  say :  We  are  un- 
profitable servants,  for  we  have  done  only  what 
we  were  obligated  to  do. 


blockM. 


^  or,  Apostles 


9 
10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


144 


LUKE,   XVIL 


^  Sy.  yiAx^] 


Sy. 


And  it  occurred  as  Jesus  advanced  towards  Jeru-  11 
salem,  that  he  passed  among  the  Samaritans  into 
Galilee.*^     (12)  And  when  he  drew  near  to  enter  a  12 
certain  village,  there  met  him  ten  leprous  men; 
and  they  stood  at  a  distance,  (18)  and  raised  their  13 
voice,  and  said :  Our  Babbi,  Jesus,  have  compas- 
sion upon  us.    (14)  And  when  he  had  looked  up-  14 
on  them,  he  said  to  them:  Go,  show  yourselves  to 
the  priests.    And  as  they  were  goinff,  they  were 
cleansed.    (16)  And  one  of  them,  when  he  saw  15 
that  he  was  cleansed,  returned,  and  with  a  loud 
voice,  glorified  God.    (16)  And  he  fell  on  his  fiswse,  16 
at  the  feet  of  Jesus,  and  thanked  him.    And  he 
was  a  Samaritan.    (17)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  17 
said:    Were  they  not  ten  who  were  cleansed? 
Where  are  the  nine?    (18)  Have  they  so  gone  as  18 
not  to  come  and  give  glory  to  God ;  except  this 
one,  who  is  of  another  nation?    (19)  And  he  said  19 
to  him:  Arise,  and  go:  thy  faith  hath  given  thee 
hfeA 

And  as  [some]   of  the  Pharisees  asked  him,  20 
When  the  kingdom  of  God  would  come ;  he  an- 
swered, and  said  to  them:  The  kingdom  of  Qrod 
will  not  come  with  observables.®     (21)  And  they  21 
will  not  say :  Behold,  here  it  is !  or,  Behold,  it  is 
there  1     For  lo,  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  you. 
— (22)  And  he  said  to  Ms  disciples :  The  days  will  22 
come,  when  ye  will  long  to  see  one  of  the  days  of 
the  Son  of  man,   and  ye  will  not  see  [them], 
(28)  And  if  they  shall  say  to  you :  Lo,  .here  he  is !  28 
or,  Lo,  there  he  isl   go  not  forth.    (24)  For,  as  24 
the  lightning  darteth  from  the  heavens,  and  illu- 
minateth  all  beneath  the  heavens;   so  will  the  Son 
of  man  be,  in  his  day.     (26)  But,  previously,  he  26 
is  to  suffer  many  things,  and  to  be  rejected  by  this 
generation.    {2o)  And  as  it  was  in  the  days  of  26 
Noah,  so  will  it  oe  in  the  days  of  the  Son  of  man. 
(27)   They  ate  and  drank,  they  took  wives  and  27 
were  given  to  husbands,  until  the  day  that  Noah 
entered  the  ark ;  and  the  flood  came,  and  destroyed 
every  one.     (28)  And  again,  as  it  was  in  the  days  28 
of.  Lot ;  they  ate  and  drank,  bought  and  sold, 
planted  and  built.     (29)  But  in  the  dav  that  Lot  28 
^ent  out  of  Sodom,   the  Lord  rained  fire  and 
sulphur  from  heaven,    and  destroyed  them  all. 
(80)  Thus  will  it  be,  in  the  day  when  the  Son  of  80 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XVIIL 


14fi 


31  man  shall  be  revealed  (8!)  In  that  day,  let  him 
that  is  on  the  house-top,  ana  his  goods  in  the  house, 
not  come  down  to  take  them :  and  let  him  that  is 
in  the  field,  not  return  [after  what  is]  behind  him. 

82  (82)  Remember  Lot's  wife.    (88)  He  that  desireth 

83  to  preserve^  his  life,  will  lose  it;   and  he  that 

84  will  lose  his  life,  shall  preserved  it  (84)  I  tell 
you,  that,  in  that  night,  two  will  be  in  one  bed: 

85  one  will  be  taken,  and  the  other  left.  (85)  And 
two  females  will  be  grinding  together;  one  will  be 

36  taken,  and  the  other  left.  (86)  Two  men  will  be 
in  the  field ;  one  will  be  taken,  and  the  other  left. 

37  — (87)  They  answered,  and  said  to  hun :  Whither, 
our  Lord?  He  said  to  them:  Where  the  body 
is,  there  will  the  eagles  assemble  themselves. — 

XYHL  And  he  spoke  to  them  a  similitude  also,  that 
men  should  pray  at  all  times,» .  and  not  become 

2  weary.  (2)  There  was  a  judge  in  a  certain  city, 
who    feared    not   God,   and    regarded  not  men. 

3  (8)  And  thei:e  was  a  certain  widow  in  that  city ; 
and  she  came  to  him',   and  said:   Vindicate  me 

4  against  my  adversary.    (4)  And  he  would  not,  for 
a  long  time :  but  afterwards,  he  said  to  himself 
Though  I  fear  not  God,   and  regard  not  men, 

6  (5)  yet,  because  this  widow  troubleth  me,  I  will 
vincncate  her ;  that  she  may  not  be  always  coming 

6  and  troubling  me.    (6)  And  our  Lord  said:  Hear 

7  what  the  unjust  judge  saith.  (7)  And  will  not 
God,  much  more,  vindicate  his  chosen,  who  call 
upon  him  by  dav  and  by  night ;  and  have  patience 

8  with  them?  (8)  I  tell  you,  He  will  vindicate  them 
speedily.  Yet  the  Son  of  man  will  come;  and 
will  he  find  fidth  on  the  earth? 

9  And  he  spake  this  similitude,  against  certain 
persons,  who  had  confidence  in  themselves  that 
they  were   righteous,    and    despised  every  one. 

10  (10)  Two  men  went  up  to  the  temple  to  pray ;  the 

11  one  a  Pharisee,  and  the  other  a  publican.  (11)  And 
the  Pharisee  stood  by  himself,  and  prayed  thus : 
God,  I  thank  thee  that  I  have  not  been  like  the 
rest  of  men,  rapacious,  oppressive,  and  adulterous ; 

12  nor  like  this  publican.    (i2)  But  I  fast  twice  in  a 
18  week,  and  tithe  all  I  possess.    (18)  And  the  pub- 
lican stood  afer  of^  and  would  not  even  lift  his  eyes 
to  heaven,  but  smote  upon  his  breast,  and  said: 

14  God.  be  meroiftQ  to  me^  a  sinner.    (14)  I  say  to 


Digitized  by 


'  Sy.  VmJj 


Sy.  CTU>^ 


or,  every  op^ 


Google 


146 


LUKE,   XVIIL 


>  8?.  «O?ll0 


Sy.l 


f^NV) 


U^ 


'8y.]»>Vn\ 


*  Gr.  Pe/er. 


you,  that  this  [man]  went  down  to  his  house  justi- 
fied, *»  rather  than  the  Pharisee.  For  every  one 
that  exalteth  himself  will  be  humbled;  and  every 
one  that  humbleth  himself  will  be  extdted. 

And  they  brought  to  him  infants,  that  he  might  16 
touch  them :  and  his  disciples  saw  them,  and  re- 
buked them.    (16)  But  Jesus  called  them,  and  16 
said  to  them:    SuflFer  little  children  to  come  to 
me,  and  forbid  them  not ;  for  of  those  that  are 
like  them,  of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  heaven. 
(17)  Verily  I  say  to  you.  That  ne  who  shall  not  17 
receive  the  kingdom  of  God,  as  a  little  child,  will 
not  enter  it. 

And  one  of  the  chiefs^'  asked  him,  and  said  to  18 
him:  Good  Teacher,^  what  shall  I  do,  that  I  may 
inherit  eternal  life?    (19)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Why  19 
callest  thou  me,  good?    For,  there  is  none  good, 
except  one;  God.    (20^  Thou  knowest  the  com-  20 
mandments :  Thou  shalt  not  kill ;  and  thou  shalt 
not  commit  adultery;  and  thou  shalt  not  steal; 
and  thou  shalt  not  testify  a  false  testimony ;  honor 
thy  father   and   thy  mother.     (21)    He  said  to  21 
him :  All  these  have  I  kept,  from  my  childhood. 
(22^  And  when  Jesus  heard  these  [words],  he  said  22 
to  nim:  One  thing  is  lacking  to  thee:  go,  sell  all 
that  thou  hast,  and  give  to  the  poor;  and  thou 
wilt  have  a  treasure  in  heaven;  and  come  after  me. 
(28)  And  he,  when  he  heard  these  [words],  was  28 
dejected;  for  he  was  very  rich.    (2^  And  when  24 
Jesus  saw  that  he  was  dejected,  he  said:   How 
difficult  [it  is],  for  those  that  have  wealth,  to  enter 
into  the  kingdom  of  God !     (25)  It  is  easier  for  a  25 
camel  to  enter  the  eye  of  a  needle,  than  a  rich 
man  the  kingdom  of  God.    (26)  They  who  heard  26 

fit],  said  to  him:    Who   then  can  have«  life? 
J27)  And  Jesus  said:  Those  things  which,  with  27 
men,  cannot  be,  with  God,  can  be. — (28)    Simon  28 
Cephas^  said  to  him :  Lo,  we  have  left  every  thing, 
ana  come  after  thee.    (29)  Jesus  said  to  him:  29 
Verily  I  say  to  you :  There  is  no  man,  who  hath 
left  houses,  or  parents,  or  brothers,  or  wife,  or  chil- 
dren, for  the  sjSce  of  the  kmgdom  of  God,  (80)  that  80 
shall  not  receive  manifold  in  the  present  time, 
and,  in  the  coming  world,  eternal  life. 

And  Jesus  took  his  twelve,  and  said  to  them .  81 
Behold,  we  are  going  up  to  Jerusalem ;  and  all  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  XIX 


147 


things  written  in  the  prophets,  concerning  tiie  Son 

82  of  man,  will  be  fulfilled.  (82)  For  he  will  be  de- 
livered over  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  they  will  mock 

88  him,  and  spit  in  his  face ;  (83)  and  will  scourge  him, 
and  will  treat  him  with  ignominy,  and  mil  loll 

84  him ;  and,  the  third  day,  ne  will  arise.  (84)  But 
not  one  of  these  things,  did  they  understand;  but 
this  subject?  was  hidden  from  them,  and  they  knew 
not  the  things  told  to  them. 

86  And  as  they  came  near  to  Jericho,  a  blind  man 
was  sitting   by  the  side  of  the  way,  begging. 

86  (36)  And  he  heard  the  noise  of  the  multitude  that 

37  passed,  and  inquired  what  it  was.  (87)  They 
say  to  him:  Jesus  the  Nazarean  is  passing  by. 

88  (88)  And  he  called  out,  and  said :  Jesus,  Son  of 

39  David,  have  mercy  on  me.  (89)  And  they  that 
went  before  Jesus  rebuked  him,  that  he  might  be 
silent    But  he  cried  out  the  more.  Son  of  fiavid, 

40  have  mercy  on  me.  (40)  And  Jesus  stood,  and 
commanded  him  to  be  called  to  him.    And  yrhen 

41  he  came  to  him,  he  asked  him,  (41)  and  said  to 
him:  What  wilt  thou,  that  I  do  for  thee?    And 

42  he  said :  My  Lord,  that  I  may  see.  (42J  And 
Jesus  said  to  him :  See  thou ;  thy  faith  hatn  vivi* 

48  fied^  thee.  (48)  And  immediately  he  saw.  And 
lie  followed  after  him,  and  glorifiea  God.  And  all 
the  people  who  beheld,  gave  glory  to  God. 

XTX.    And  as  Jesus  entered  and  passed  through 

2  Jericho,  (2)  [there  was]  a  certain  man,  whose  name 
was  ZaxKjheus,*  who  was  rich,  and  chief  *>  of  the 

8  publicans;  (8)  and  he  wished  to  see  Jesus,  who  he 
was;  and  could  not,  on  account  of  the  crowd;  be- 

4  cause  Zaccheus  was  small  in  stature.  (4)  And  he 
ran  forward  of  Jesus,  and  climbed  a  wila  fig-tree, 
in  order  to  see  him ;  for  he  was  to  pass  that  way. 

6  (5)  And  when  Jesus  came  to  the  place,  he  saw 
him,  and  said  to  him :  Make  haste  and  come  down, 
Zaccheus;    for  I  must  be  at  thy  house  to-day. 

6  (6)  And  he  hastened,  and  came  down,  and  received 

7  him  with  gladness.  (7)  And  when  they  all  saw 
[it],  they  murmured,  and  said :  He  hath  gone  in 

8  to  be  guest  with  a  man  that  is  a  sinner.  (8^  And 
Zaccheus  stood  up,  and  said  to  Jesus:  Behold,  my 
Lord,  the  half  of  my  riches  I  give  to  the  poor; 
and  to  ever^  man,  whom  I  have  wronged  in  any 


«  Sy.  word. 


hSy  y^Ai^l 


•Sy.  .^ai 

«•  Sy.  ^i 


Digitized  by 


Google 


148 


LUKE,   XIX. 


<"  Sy.  )j1i 


') 


«  or,  parable. 


Gr.  jAvof . 
sSy.  sons. 


thing,  I  restore  fourfold.    (9)  Jesus  said  to  him:    9 
This  day,  life*'  is  to  this  house;  for  he  also  is  a  son 
of  Abraham.    (10]  For  the  Son  of  man  came,  to  10 
seek  and  to  vivify^  that  which  was  lost. 

And  when  they  heard  these  things,  he  proceeded  11 
to  utter  a  similitude ;«  because  he  was  near  to  Jeru- 
salem, and  they  supposed  that  the  kingdom  of  God 
was  to  be  soon  develoi)ed.    (12)  And  he  said :  A  12 
certain  man  of  high  birth  was  going  to  a  distant 

Elace,  to  obtain  royalty,  and  return  again.  (18)  And  18 
e  called  his  ten  servants,  and  gave  them  ten 
pounds 'S  and  he  said  to  them,  Traffic  until  I  come. 
(14]  But  the  inhabitants*  of  his  city  hated  him ;  14 
ana  they  sent  envoys  after  him,  saying:  We  wish 
ikis  man  not  to  reign  over  us.    (15)  And  when  he  15 
had  obtained  the  royalty,  and  had  returned,  he 
commanded  those  servants  to  be  called,  to  whom 
he  had  conmiitted  his  money ;  that  he  might  know 
what    each    of  them    haa    gained    by  trading. 
(16)  And  the  first  came,  and  said:  My   lord,  thy  16 
pound  hath  gained  ten  pounds.    (17)  He  said  to  17 
nim:   Well  lone,  good  servant!     As  thou  hast 
been  faithful  over  a  little,  thou  shalt  have  author- 
ity over  ten  towns.     (18)  And  the  second  came,  18 
and  said :  My  lord,  thy  pound  hath  produced  five 
pounds.    (19)  He  said  likewise  to  him:  Thou  also  19 
shalt  have  authority  over  five  towns.     (20)  And  20 
another  came,  and  said :  My  lord,  lo,  tms  is  thy 
pound,  which  hath  been  with  me,  laid  up  in  fine 
linen.    (21)  For  I  was  a&aid  of  thee,  because  thou  21 
art  a  hard  man,  and  takest  up  that  which  thou  lay- 
edst  not  down,  and  reapest  that  which  thou  sowedst 
not.     (22^  He  said  to  him :  Out  of  thy  own  mouth  22 
will  I  juage  thee,  thou  evil  servant.    Thou  knew- 
est  me,  that  I  am  a  hard  man,  and  that  I  take  up 
what  I  laid  not  down,  and  reap  what  I  sowed  notl 
(23)  Why  didst  thou  not  put  my  money  into  the  23 
broker's  bands,  that  when  I  came,  I  might  have 
demanded  it  with  interest?    (24)  And  he  said  to  24 
them  that  stood  before  him:  Take  fi:om  him  the 
pound,  and  give  it  to  him  with  whom  are  the  ten 
pounds.     (25)  They  say  to  him :  Our  lord,  there  25 
are  with  him  ten  pounds.    (26)  He  said  to  them:  26 
I  tell  you,  that  to  every  one  that  hath,  will  be 


given ;  and  firom  him  that  hath  not,  even  what  he 
nath  will  be  taken  away.    (27)  But  as  for  those 


27 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XIX. 


149 


my  enemies,  who  would  not  have  me  to  reign  over 
iliem,  bnng:  them  and  slav  them  before  me. 

28  And  wnen  Jesus  liad  spoken  these  things,  he 

29  went  forward,  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  (29)  And  when 
he  arrived  at  Bethphage  and  Bethany,  near  to  the 
mount  called  the  place  of  Olives,  he  sent  two  of 

30  his  disciples,  (80)  and  said  to  them:  Go  ye  to  the 
village  that  is  over  against  us,  and  as  ye  enter  [it], 

ire  will  find  a  colt  tieo^  on  which  no  man  ever  rode ; 
oose  [him]  and  bring  [him].  (81)  And  if  any 
man  ask  you.  Why  do  ye  loose  him?  say  to  him: 

32  Our  Lord  needeth  him.  (82)  And  they  went  who 
were  sent,  and  they  found,  as  he  said  to  them. 

S3  (88)  And  as  they  loosed  the  colt,  the  owner  of 
him  said  to  them:  Why  do  ye  loose  that  colt? 

84  (84)  And  they  said:  Because  our  Lord  needeth 

35  him.  (85)  And  they  brought  him  to  Jesus.  And 
they  cast  their  garments  upon  the  colt,  and  set 

86  Jesus  upon  him.    ^S§).  And  .^.„he  went| .  tt^y, 

ST  tW^^^  ^^^^^  giirP^^^-^^"  t^fi  '^^j  (37)  And  when 
he  came  near  to  the  descent  of  tiie  place  of  Olives, 
the  whole  multitude  of  the  disciples  began  to  re- 
joice, and  to  praise  God,  with  a  loud  voice,  for  all 

88  the  mighty  deeds^  which  they  had  seen.  (38)  And 
they  said :  Blessed  be  the  king,  that  cometh  in  the 
name  of  the  Lord :  peace  in  heaven,  and  glory  on 
high.  (39)  And  some  of  the  Pharisees  from  among 
the  crowd,  said  to  him :  Eabbi,  rebuke  thy  disci- 
ples. (40)  He  said  to  them :  I  tell  vou,  that,  if 
these  should  be  silent,  the  stones  would  cry  out — 
(41)  And  as  he  drew  near,  and  beheld  the  city,  he 
wept  over  it:  (42)  and  said:  0,  hadst  thou  known 
the  things  that  are  of  thy  peace,  at  least  in  this  thy 
day:  but  now  they  are  hidden  from  thy  eyea 
(48)  For  the  days  will  come  upon  thee,  when  thy 
enemies  will  encompass  thee,  and  besiege  thee  on 

44  every  side.  (44)  And  they  will  destroy  thee,  and 
thy  children  within  thee;  and  will  not  leave  in 
thee  one  stone*  upon  another;  because  thou  knew- 

45  est  not  the  time  of  thy  visitation. — (45)  And  when 
he  entered  the  temple,  he  began  to  expel  those 

46  who  bought  and  sold  in  it.  (46)  And  he  said  to 
them :  It  is  written,  My  house  is  a  house  of  prayer ; 

47  but  ye  have  made  it  a  den  of  robbers. — (4?)  And 
he  taught  daily  in  the  temple :  and  the  chief  priests 
and  Scribes  and  Elders  of  the  people,  sought  to 

Digitized  by 


39 

40 

41 
42 


43 


'Sy.piM 


Sj.sUmtvpM 
stone. 


Google 


150 


LUKE,    XX. 


tmd. 


destroy  him.    (48)  But  they  found  not,  what  they  48 
could  do  to  him;  for  all  the  people  hung  upon  him 
to  hear  him. 

And  on  one  of  those  days,  as  he  was  teaohingXX. 
the  people  in  the  temple,  and  preaching,  the  chief 
priests  and  Scribes,  with  the  Elders,  came  upon 
him,  (2)  and  said  to  him:  Tell  us,  by  what  author-    2 
ity  thou  doest  these  things?    And  who  is  it,  that 
gave  thee  this  authority?     (8)  Jesus  answered,    3 
and  said  to  them:  I  also  will  ask  you  a  word, 
and  tell  ye  me.    (4)  The  baptism  of  John,  was  it    4 
firom  heaven,  or  from  men?    (6)  And  they  rea-    5 
soned  with  themselves,  and  said:  If  we  say.  From 
heaven ;  he  will  say  to  us.  And  why  did  ye  not 
believe  him?    (6)  6ut  if  we  say,  From  men;  all    6 
the  people  will  stone  us ;  for  tney  are  persuaded 
that  John  was  a  prophet    (7)  ^d  they  said  to    7 
him :  We  do  not  know,  whence  it  was.    (8^  Jesus    8 
said  to  them:  Neither  do  I  tell  you,  by  wnat  au- 
thority I  do  these  things. 

And  he  began  to  utter  this  similitude  to  the    9 
people:  A  certain  man  planted  a  vineyard,  and 
leased  it  to  cultivators,  and  went  abroad  for  a  long 
time.    (10)  And  in  time,  he  sent  his  servant  to  the  10 
cultivators,  that  they  might  give  him  of  the  fruits 
of  the  vineyard.    But  me  cultivators  beat  him, 
and  sent  him  away  empty.    (11^  And  again^  he  11 
sent  another  servant ;  and  him  also  they  Ssat,  and 
treated  with    rudeness,    and  sent  empl^  away. 
(12)  And  again^  he  sent  the  third,    j^d  they  12 
wounded  him,  and  cast  him  out    (18)  The  lorn  13 
of  the  vineyard  said:    What  shall  I  do?    I  will 
send  my  dear  son.    Perhaps  they  will  look  upon 
him,  and  be  ashamed.    (14)  But  when  the  cultiva-  14 
tors  saw  him,  they  reasoned  with  themselves,  and 
said:  This  is  the  neir;  come,  let  us  kill  him,  and 
the  inheritance  will  be  ours.    (15)  And  they  cast  15 
him  out  of  the  vineyard,  and  slew  him.     What 
therefore  will  the  lord  of  the  vineyard  do  to  them? 

(16)  He  will  come,  and  destroy  those  cultivators,  16 
and  will  lease  the  vineyard  to  others. — ^And  when 
they  heard   [it],  they  said:    This  shall  not  be. 

(17)  And  he  looked  upon  them,  and  said:  What  17 
is  that  which  is  written.  The  stone,  which  the 
builders  rejected,  is  become  the  chief  comer  stone? 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  XX. 


151 


18  (18)  And  whoever  shall  &11  apon  this  stone,  will  be 
broken;  and  on  whomsoever  it  shall  fiedl,  it  will 

19  cmsh  him  in  pieces.  (19)  And  the  ohief  priests 
and  Scribes  sought  to  lay  hands  on  him,  at  that 
time;<^  but  they  were  afraid  of  the  people;  for 
they  knew,  that  he  spoke  this  similitude  against 
them.    • 

20  And  they  sent  to  him  spies,  who  feigned  them- 
selves righteous  men,  that  they  might  insnare  hhn 
in  discourse,  and  deliver  him  up  to  a  court,  and  to 

21  the  authorilgr  of  the  president^  (2D  And  they 
questioned  him,  and  said  to  him:  Teacher,*  we 
know  that  thou  speakest  and  teachest  correctly, 
and  hast  no  respect  of  persons,  but  teachest  the 

22  way  of  God  in  truth.    (22)  Is  it  lawful  for  us  to 
28  pay  head-money  to  Csesar,  or  not?    ^28)  But  he 

perceived  their  crafldness,  and  said:  Wny  tempt  ye 
24  me?    (24)  Show  me  a  denarius.    Whose  is  this 

image  and  superscription  upon  it?  They  said  to 
26  him,  CsBsar's.    (25^  Jesus  said  to  them :  Then,  give 

to  Csesar  what  is  Gsesar's,  and  to  God  what  is  Gted's. 

26  (26)  And  they  could  not  catch  from  him  a  word 
[of  accusation]  before  the  people :  and  they  were 
surprised  at  his  answers,  and  were  silent. 

27  And  some  of  the  Sadducees,  who  sa^  there  is  no 

28  resurrection,  came  and  questioned  hmi,  (28)  and 
said  to  him:  Teacher,  Moses  wrote  to  us,  that  if  a 
man's  brother  die,  who  had  a  wife  without  chil* 
dren,  his  [surviving]  brother  shaU  take  his  wife,  and 

29  raise  up  seed  to  his  [deceased]  brother.  (29)  Now, 
there  were  seven  brothers;  and  the  firet  took  a 

80  wife,  and  died  without  clnldren.  (80)  And  tiie 
second  took  her  to  wife ;  and  he  died  without  chil- 

81  dren.  (81)  And  again,  the  third  took  her^  and  in 
like  manner  also  all  the  seven ;  and  they  died,  and 

82  left  no  children.    (82)  At  last,  the  woman  likewise 
88  died.    (88)  In  the  resurrection,  therefore,  of  which 

of  Aem  wiU  she  be  the  wife,  for  the  seven  took  her  ? 

84  (84)  Jesus  said  to  them:  The  children  of  this 
world  take  wives,  and  mves  are  given  to  husbands. 

85  (85)  But  they  who  are  worthy  of  that  world,  and 
of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  do  not  take 

86  wives,  nor  are  wives  given  to  husbands.  (86)  Ner 
ther  can  they  die  any  more ;  for  thev  are  as  tiie 
angels,  and  are  the  children  of  God,  because  they 

87  are  children  of  the  resurrection.    (87)  But  that 


«  Sy.  how. 


sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


L62 


LUKE,   XXL 


^^*^^^\v*^ 


Sy.ljQkl* 


tiie  dead  will  arisei  even  Moses  showed ;  for,  at  the 
bush,  he  maketh  mention,  while  he  saith:  The 
Lord,  the  God  of  Abraham,  the  God  of  Isaac,  and 
the  God  of  Jacob.    (38)  Now  God  is  not  [the  God]  88 
of  the  dead,  but  of  the  living;  for  they  all  live  to 
him.    (39)  And  some  of  the  Scribes  answered,  39 
and  said  to  him :  Teacher,  thou  hast  spoken  well. 
(40)  And  they  did  not  again  venture  to'  question  40 
him,  on  any  matter. 

And  he  said  also  to  them :  How  do  the  Scribes  41 
say  of  Messiah,   that  he  is  the  son  of  David? 
(42)    And  David  himself  said,   in  the  book  of  42 
Fsahns :  The  Lord  said  to  my  Lord,  seat  thyself 
at  my  right  hand,  (43)  until  I  shall  place  thy  foes^  43 
under  thy  feet.    (44)  If  David,  therefore,  called  44 
him,  My  Lord;   how  is  he  his  son?    (46)  And  46 
while  ail  the  people  heard,  he  said  to  his  disciples : 
(46)  Beware  of  tne  Scribes,  who  choose  to  walk  in  46 
long  robes,  and  love  a  salutation  in  the  streets,  and 
the  chief  seats  in  the  synagogues,  and  the  chief 
couches  at  suppers:  (47)  who  eat  up  the  houses  of  47 
widows,  under  pretence  that  they  prolong  their 
prayers.  They  will  receive  a  greater  condemnation. 

And  Jesus  looked  upon  the  rich,  who  cast  their  XXL 
oblations  into  the  treasury.    (2)  And  he  saw  also    2 
a  certain  poor  widow,  who  cast  in  two  mites.* 
(3)  And  he  said :  Truly  I  say  to  you,  that  this  poor    8 
widow  hath  cast  in  more  than  any  one.    (4)  For    4 
all  they,  from  what  was  superfluous  to  them,  have 
cast  into  the  receptacle  of  oblations  to  God ;  but 
she,  from  her  penury,  hath  cast  in  all  that  she 


And  when  some  spoke  of  the  temple,  as  adorned 
with  goodly  stones  and  oblations,  Jesus  said  to 
them :  (6)  [As  for]  these  things,  on  which  ye  gaase, 
the  days  will  come,  in  which  there  will  not  be  left 
a  stone  upon  a  stone,  that  is  not  cast  down.  (7)  And 
thev  questioned  him,  and  said:  Teacher,  when 
will  these  things  be?  And  what  is  the  sign  that 
they  are  near  to  take  place?  (8)  And  he  said  to 
them:  See,  that  ye  be  not  deceived;  for  many 
will  come  in  my  name,  and  will  say :  I  am  Messiah ; 
and  the  time  is  near.  But  go  ye  not  after  them. 
(9)  And  when  ye  shall  hear  of  wars  and  commo- 
tions, be  not  afraid ;  for  these  things  are  previously 


Digitized  l^y 


Google 


LUKE,   XXI. 


153 


^  Sy.  mortalities. 


e  oTf  synagogues 


10  to  take  pjlaoe,  but  the  end  is  not  yet  come.  (10)  For 
PAtion  will  rise  against  nation,  and  kingdom  agaiiiSt 

11  kingdom ;  (11)  and  great  earthquakes  \rill  occur  in 
several  places,  and  mmines,  and  pestilences;^  and 
there  will  be  terrors,  and  trepidations,  and  great  signs 
Bcom  heaven  will  be  seen,  and  there  will  be  great 

12  tempests. — (12)  But  before  all  these  things,  they 
will  lay  hands  upon  you,  and  will  persecute  jou, 
and  will  deliver  you  up  to  councils®  and  to  prison, 
and  will  arraign  you  before  kin^  and  governors,** 

18  on  account  of  my  name.  (18)  JBut  it  will  be  to 
14  vou  for  a  testimony.    (14)  And  settle  it  in  your 

hearts,  that  ye  will  not  previously  seek  instruction 
16  for  making  a  defence.    (16)  For  I  will  give  you  a 

mouth  ana  wisdom,  which  all  your  enemies  \rill 

16  be  unable  to  withstand.  (16)  And  your  parents, 
and  your  brothers,  and  your  relatives,  and  vour 
friends,  will  deliver  you  up,  and  cause  some  of  you 

17  to  die.    (17)  And  ye  will  be  hated  by  eveir  one, 

18  on  account  of  my  name.    (18)  But  a  hair  of  your 

19  head  shall  not  perish.    (19)  And  by  your  patience, 

20  will  ye  preserve  your  souls. — (20)  And  when  ye 
shall  see  Jerusalem  with  an  army  encompassing  it, 
then  know  ye,  that  its  destruction  draweth  nigh. 

21  (21)  Then  let  them  who  shall  be  in  Judsea,  flee  to 
the  mountain  [district] ;  and  let  them,  who  are  in 
the  midst  of  iy  flee  away ;  and  those  in  the  fields, 

22  not  enter  it.  (22)  For  these  are  days  of  vengeance, 
28  to  fulfill  all  that  is  written.    (28)  But  woe  to  them 

that  are  with  child,  and  to  them  that  nurse  chil- 
dren, in  those  days ;  for  then  will  be  great  distress 

24  in  the  land,^  and  wrath  upon  this  people.  (24)  And 
they  will  fall  by  the  edge?  of  the  sword,  and  be 
carried  captive  to  every  place.  And  Jerusalem 
will  be  trodden  down  by  the  Gentiles,  until  the 

26  times  of  the  Gentiles  shall  be  completed.— (25)  And 
there  will  be  signs  in  the  sun,  and  in  the  moon, 
and  in  the  stars ;  and  distress  of  nations  on  the 
earth ;  and  clasping  of  hands,  from  astonishment 

26  at  the  noise  of  the  sea;  (26)  and  dismay  that 
driveth  out  the  souls  of  men,  firom  fear  of  that 
which  is  to  come  on  the  earth ;  and  the  powers**  »>  or,  armim. 

27  of  heaven  will  be  moved.  (27)  And  then  will 
they  see  the  Son  of  man  coming  m  the  clouds,  with 

28  much  power,  and  with  great  gloty.  (28)  And 
when  these  things  shall  begin  to  be,  take  courage, 


•lt,Jeru9dlmn 


'Sy. 

f  Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


164 


LUKE,  XXIL 


'Sy.l^i- 


^Sf.  earth. 


^Hf.\x^ 


and  lift  up  your  heads,  for  your  deKveranoe  draw- 
eth  nigh.-— (29)  And  he  uttered  a  similitude  to  29 
them.    Look  at  the  fig-tree,  and  all  the  trees. 
(80)  When  they  bud  forth,  ye  at  once  understand  80 
m)m  them,  that  summer  approacheth.   (81)  So  also,  81 
when  ye  shall  see  all  these  things  take  place,  know 
ye  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  near.    (82)  Verily  82 
i  say  to  you,  That  this  generation^  will  not  pass 
away,  until  all  these  things  occur.    (88^  Heaven  83 
and  earth  will  pass  away ;  but  my  word  will  not 
pass  away. — (84)  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that  84 
your  hearts  be,  at  no  time,  stupefied  by  gluttony 
and  ebriety  and  worldly  care;  and  so  that  dav 
come  upon  vou  unawares.    (36)  For,  like  a  hunters  86 
snare,  it  wiU  spring  upon  all  tnem  that  dwell  upon 
the  face  of  the  whole  land.k    (36)  Be  ye  there-  86 
fore  vigilant,  at  all  times,  and  prayerful ;  that  ye 
may  be  worthv  to  escape  the  things  that  are  to 
take  place,  and  may  stand  before  the  Son  of  man. 
—(87)  And,  in  the  daytime  he  taught  in  the  tem-  87 
pie,  and  at  night  he  went  out  and  lodged  in  the 
mount,  called  the  Place  of  Olives.    (88^  And  all  88 
the  people  came  early  to  him  in  the  temple,  to  hear 
his  discourse. 

And  the  feast  of  unleavened  cakes,  which  is  XXIL 
called  the  passover,  drew  near.    (2)  And  the  chief     2 

Eriests  ana  Scribes  sought  how  they  might  kill 
im,  for  they  were  afiraid  of  the  people.    (8)  And    8 
Satan^  entered  into  Judas  called  Iscariot,  wno  was 
of  the  number  of  the  twelve.    (4)  And  he  went    4 
and  conferred  with  the  chief  priests  and  Scribes, 
and  the  military  commanders  of  the  temple,  how 
he  might  betray  him  to  them.    (6)  And  they  were    6 
glad,  and  covenanted  to  give  him  money.    (6)  And    6 
he  promised  them,  and  sought  opportunity  to  be- 
tray him  to  them,  in  the  absence  of  the  multitude. 

And  the  day  of  unleavened  cakes  arrived,  on    7 
which  it  was  customary  for  the  passover  to  be  slain. 
(8)  And  Jesus  sent  Cephas  and  John,  and  said  to    8 
them:  Go,  prepare  for  us  the  passover,  that  we 
may  eat  it    (9)  And  they  said  to  him:  Where    9 
wilt  thou,  that  we  prepare  ?    (10)  He  said  to  them :  IC 
Lo,  when  ye  enter  the  city,  there  will  a  man  meet 
you,  beanng  a  vessel  of  water.    Gto  after  him ; 
(11)  and  where  he  entereth  say  ye  to  the  lord  of  11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XXIL 


156 


^  or,  AposUm. 
Sy. 


17 
18 


20 


<  Sy.  ubOuAii) 


the  house :  Our  Babbi  saith,  Is  there  a  place  of  re- 
freshment, in  which  I  may  eat  the  Passover,  with 
12  my  disciples?    (12)  And  lo,  he  will  show  you  a 
large  upper  room  that  is  furnished ;  there  prepare 

18  ye.  (IS)  And  they  went,  and  found  as  he  had 
said  to  tnem:  and  they  niade  ready  the  passover. 

14  — (14)  And  when  the  time  arrived,  Jesus  came 
and  reclined;  and  the  twelve  Legates^  with  him. 

16  (15)  And  he  said  to  them :  I  have  greatly  desired^^ 
to  eat  this  passover  with  you,  ^fore  I  suffer. 

16  (16)  For  I  say  to  vou,  That  henceforth  I  shall  not 
eat  it,  until  it  be  nilfilled  in  the  kingdom  of  God. 
(17)  [And  he  took  the  cup,  and  gave  thanks,  and 
said :  Take  this,  and  divide  it  among  you.  (18)  For 
I  say  to  you,  That  I  shall  not  drink  of  the  product 
of  the  vine,  until  the  kingdom  of  God  shall  come.*] 

19  — (19)  And  he  took  bread,  and  gave  thanks,  and 
brake,  and  ^ve  to  them,  and  said:  This  is  my 
body,  which  is  given  for  your  sakes.  This  do  ye, 
in  remembrance  of  me.  (20)  And  in  like  manner 
also  concerning  the  cup,  after  they  had  supped,  he 
said :  This  cup  is  the  new  testament^  in  my  blood, 

21  which,  for  your  sakes,  is  poured  out! — (21)  But, 
behold,  the  hand  of  him  that  betrayeth  me  is  on 

22  the  table.  (22)  And  the  Son  of  man  goeth,  as  it 
was  determined;  but  woe  to  that  man,  by  whom 

28  he  is  betrayed.  (28)  And  they  began  to  inquire 
among  themselv^  which  of  them  it  was,  that 
would  do  this. 

24  And  there  was  contention  also  among  them,  who 

25  among  them  would  be  greatest  (25)  And  Jesus 
said  to  them:  The  kin^  of  the  nations,  are  their 
lords ;  and  those  exercising  authority  over  them, 
are  called  benefactors.  (26)  But  ye,  not  so:  but 
he  that  is  great  among  you,  niust  be  as  the  least ; 
and  he  that  is  chief,  as  the  servitor.  (27)  For, 
which  is  the  greater,  he  that  redineth,  or  he  that 
serveth?    Is  not  he  that  reclineth?    But  I  am 

28  among  you,  as  he  that  serveth.    (28)  Ye  are  they 

29  who  have  continued  with  me  in  mv  trials :  (29)  and 
I  promise  to  you,  as  my  Father  hath  promised  to 
me,  a  kmgdom :  (80)  that  ye  may  eat  and  drink  at 
the  table  of  my  kingdom,  and  may  sit  on  thrones, 
and  judge  the  twelve  tribes  of  Israel. 


*  Adler  says,  Teraes  17, 18»  are  wanting  in  all  MSS.  of  the  Peshitto. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


26 
27 


80 


156 


LUKE,   XXII. 


And  Jesus  said  to  Simon :  Simon,  lo,  Satan  hath  81 
desired  to  sift  thee,  as  wheat:   (82)  but  I  have  82 
prayed  for  thee,  that  thy  faith  may  not  fidl.     And 
thou  also,  in  time,  turn ;  and  confirm  thy  brethren. 
88)  And  Simon  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  with  thee  83 
t  am   ready,    both   for   prison    and    for  death. 
(84J  Jesus  said  to  him:   J  tell  thee,  Simon,  the  84 
cock  will  not  crow  this  day,  until  thou  hast  three 
times  denied  that  thou  knowest  me.— (85)  And  he  85 
said-  to  them :  When  I  sent  you  without  purses, 
without  wallets  and  shoes,  lackedye  any  thing? 
They  say  to  him:  Nothing.    (86)  He  said  to  them:  86 
Henceforth,  let  him  that  hath  a  purse,  take  it;  and 
so  lUcewise  a  wallet.    And  let  him  that  hath  no 
sword,  sell  bis  garment,  and  buy  himself  a  sword. 
(87)  For  I  say  to  you,-  That  this  also,  which  was  87 
written,  must  be  mlfilled  in  me :  I  shall  be  num- 
bered with  transgressors.    For,  all  that  relates  to 
me,  will  be  fulfilled.     (88)  And  they  said  to  him :  88 
Our  Lord,  lo,  here  are  two  swords.    He  said  to 
them :  They  are  sufficient 

And  he  went  out,  and  proceeded,  as  was  his  cus-  89 
tom,  to  the  mount  of  the  place  of  Olives ;  and  his 
disciples  followed  him.    (40)  And  when  he  arrived  40 
at  the  place,  he  said  to  them :  Pray  ye,  that  ye  en- 
ter not  into  temptation.     (41)  And  he  retired  from  41  . 
them,  about  a  stone's  throw;  and  kneeled  down, 
and  prayed,  (42)  and  said :  Father,  if  it  please  thee,  42 
let  this  cup  pass  from  me:     Yet  not  my  pleasure, 
but  thine,  be  done.     (48)  And  there  appeared  to  48 
him  an  angel  from  heaven,  who  strengtnened  him. 
(44)  And  as  he  was  in  fear,  he  prayed  earnestly;  44 
and  his  sweat  was  like  drops  of  blood ;  and  it 
fell  on  the  ground.    (45)  And  he  arose  from  his  45 
prayer,  and  came  to  his  disciples:  and  he  found 
them  sleeping,  from  sorrow.     (46)  And  he  said  to  46 
them :  Why  sleep  ye  ?    Arise,  and  pray,  lest  ye 
enter  into  temptation. — (47)  And  while  he  was  47 
speaking,  lo,  a  multitude,  and  be  that  was  called 
Judas,  one  of  the  twelve,  came  at  their  head.  And 
he  came  up  to  Jesus,  and  kissed  him.    For  he  had 
ffiven  them  this  sign :  Whom  I  shall  kiss,  he  it  is. 
(48)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Judas,  is  it  with  a  kiss  48 
thou  betrayest  the  Son  of  man  ?    (49)  And  when  49 
they  that  were  with  him,  saw  what  occurred,  they 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  shall  we  smite  them  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XXIL 


m 


50 


51 
62 


68 
54 


66 


the  sword?  (60)  And  one  of  them  smote  n  ser- 
vant of  the  high  priest,^  and  took  off  his  right  ear. 
(61)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said:  Simcient, 
thus  far.  And  he  touched  the  ear  of  him  that 
was  smitten,  and  healed  him. — (52)  And  Jesus 
said  to  those  who  had  come  upon  him, — ^the  chief 
priests  and  Elders  and  military  captains^  of  the 
temple :  Have  ye  come  out  against  me,  as  against 
a  roober,  with  swords,  and  with  clubs,  to  take  me? 
(58)  I  was  with  you  daily  in  the  temple,  and  ye 
laid  not  hands  upon  me.  But  this  is  your  hour, 
and  the  reign  of  darkness.  (54)  And  they  took 
him,  and  conducted  him  to  the  house  of  the  hi^h 
priest  And  Simon  followed  after  him,  at  a  dis- 
tance. (55)  And  they  kindled  a  fire  in  the  middle 
of  the  court,  and  sat  around  it ;  and  Simon  also  sat 

66  among  them.  (56)  And  a  certain  maid  saw  him 
sitting  at  the  fire,  and  she  looked  upon  him,  and 

67  said :  This  man  also  was  with  him.  (57)  But  he 
denied,  and  said:  Woman,  I  have  not  known  him. 

58  (58)  And  a  little  after,  another  [person]  saw  him. 
and  said  to  him :  Thou  too  art  one  of  them.    Ana 

69  Cephas  said:  I  am  not.  (59)  And  an  hour  after, 
another  contended  and  said:  Certainly,  this  man 
also  was  with  him,  for  he  likewise  is  a  Galilean. 

60  (60)  Cephas  said:  Man,  I  know  not  what  thou 
sayest.  And  immediately,  while  he  was  speaking, 
the  cock  crew.  (61)  Ana  Jesus  turned,  and  looked 
upon  Cephas.  And  Simon  remembered  the  word 
of  our  Lord,  which  he  spoke  to  him :  Before  the 
cock  shall  crow,  thou  wilt  deny  me  three  times. 
(62^  And  Simon  went  out,  and  wept  bitterly. — 
(68)  And  the  men  who  had  taken  Jesus,  insulted 

64  him,  and  blinded  him,  (64)  and  smote  him  on  his 
fiace,  and  said:  Prophesy  thou,  who  smote  thee? 
(65)  And  many  other  things  they  revilingly  ut- 
tered, and  spoke  against  him. 

And  when  the  day  dawned,  the  Elders  and  chief 

i)riests  and  Scribes  assembled  together;  and  they 
ed  him  to  the  place  of  their  meeting,  (67)  and  said 
to  him :  If  thou  art  the  Messiah,  tell  us.  He  said 
to  them :  If  I  tell  you,  ye  will  not  believe  in  me. 
(68)  And  if  I  should  ask  you,  ye  will  not  return 
me  an  answer ;  nor  will  ye  release  me.  (69")  From 
this  time,  the  Son  of  man  will  sit  on  the  rignt  hand 
of  the  majesty^  of  God.    (70)  And  they  all  said: 


61 


62 
68 


65 
66 


68 


TO 


•Sy. 


Sy. 


«  or  J  power. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


158 


LUKE.   XXIII. 


8y. 


■•  8|jr.  Konh. 


'etf.ijQ£;;i 


Thou  art  then,  the  Son  of  Qod  7    Jesus  said  to 
them:  Ye  say  that  I  aoL    (71)  They  say:  What  71 
further  need  nave  we  of  mtnesses?    For  we  have 
heard  from  his  own  mouth. 

And  the  whole  company  of  them  arose,  and  XXTTL 
carried  him  before  Puate.*    (2)  And  they  began    2 
to  accuse  him,  and  said:  We  haye  found  this  man 
seducing  our  people,  and  forbidding  to  pay  the 
capitation  money  to  Caesar,  and  declaring  nimself 
to  be  king  Messiah.    (8)  And  Pilate  interrogated    3 
him,  and  said  to  him :  Art  thou  king  of  the  Jews  ? 
He  said  to  him:  Thou  hast  said.    (4)  And  Pilate    4 
said  to  the  chief  priests  and  the  company :  I  find 
no  crime  upon  this  man.    (5)  And  tney  vocifera-    5 
ted,  and  said:  He  raiseth  disturbance  among  our 
people,  by  teaching  in  all  Judsea,  commencing  from 
Galilee,  and  quite  to  this  place.    (6)  And  rilate,     6 
when  he  heard  the  name  Qtdilee,  inquired  if  the 
man  were  a  Gralilean.    (7)  And  haying  learned    7 
that  he  was  from  under  Herod's  jurisdiction,  he 
sent  him  to  Herod ;  for  he  was  at  Jerusalem  on 
those  days. — (8)  And  Herod  rejoiced  greatly  when    8 
he  saw  tfesus,  for  he  had  been  desirous  to  see  him 
for  a  long  time,  because  he  bad  heard  many  things 
of  him,  and  he  hoped  to  see  some  sign  from  him. 
(9)  And  he  asked  him  many  questions  ;^  but  Jesus    9 
gaye  him  no  reply.    (10)  Ajid  the  chief  priests  10 
and  Scribes  stooa  up,  and  accused  him  yehemently. 
(11)  And  Herod  and  his  warriors^  contemned  him.  11 
And  when  he  had  mocked  him,  he  clothed  him  in 
a  purple  robe,  and  sent  him  to  Pilate.    (12)  And  12 
on  thats  day,  Pilate  and  Herod  became  friends  to 
each  other;  for  there  had  preyiouslv  been  enmity 
between  them.— (18)  And  Pilate  called  the  chief  13 
priests  and  the  rulers**  of  the  people,  (14)  and  said  14 
to  them :  Ye  haye  brought  this  man  before  me,  as  a 
disturber  of  your  people ;  and  lo,  I  haye  examined 
him  before  you,  and  I  find  in  the  man  no  crime, 
amoi^  all  that  ye  charge  upon  him.    (15)  Neither  16 
yet  Herod:  for  I  sent  him  to  him,  and  lo,  nothing 
descrying  death  hath  been  done  by  him.    (16)  I  16 
will  therefore  chastise  him,   and  release  him. — 
(17)  For  it  was  a  custom,  that  he  should  release  one  17 
at  the  festiyal. — (18)  And  sHH  the  company  yocifer-  18 
ated,  and  said:  Away  with  this  man ;  and  release 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,  XXIIL 


159 


19  to  us  Barabbaa'  (19)  He  was  one  who  had  been 
thrown  into  prison,  on  account  of  a  sedition  and 

20  murder  which  had  occurred  in  the  dtj.  (20)  And 
Pilate,  being  disposed  to  release  Jesus,  conversed 

21  with  them  again.    (21)  But  they  cried  out,  'and 

22  said:  Crucify  him;  crucify  him.  (22)  And  he 
said  to  them  the  third  time:  But,  what  evil  haih 
he  done?  I  find  no  crime  in  him  deserving  of 
death.    I  will  scourge  him,  therefore,  and  release 

23  him.  (23)  But  they  were  urgent,  with  a  loud 
voice ;  and  demanded  of  him,  that  thev  mieht  om- 

24  dfy  him.    (24)  And  Pilate  decreed,  tnat  uieir  re- 
26  quest  be  granted.    (26)  And  he  released  to  them 

him,  who  for  sedition  and  murder  had  been  cast 
into  prison,  for  whom  they  petitioned ;  and  he  de- 
livered up  Jesus  to  their  pleasure, 

26  And  as  they  led  him  away,  they  seized  Simon 
the  Cyrenian,  coming  from  the  fields,  and  laid  upon 

27  him  me  cross,  to  bear  [it]  after  Jesus.  (27)  And 
there  followed  after  him  a  great  multitude  of  peo- 
pie ;  and  those  women  [also]  who  wailed  and  la- 

28  mented  over  him.  ^8)  And  Jesus  turned  to  them, 
and  said  to  them:  Daughters  of  Jerusalem,  weep 
riot  for  me ;  but  weep  rather  for  yourselves,  and 

20  for  your  children.  (29)  For  lo,  the  days  are  com- 
ing, in  which  they  will  say :  Happy  the  barren, 
and  the  wombs  that  never  bore,  and  the  breasts 

80  that  never  nursed.  (80)  Then  will  they  begin  to 
sav  to  the  moimtains.  Fall  upon  ust  and  to  the 

81  hills,  Cover  us!  (31)  For  if  they  do  these  thmgs 
in  a  green  tree,   wnat  will    be  in  the  dry? — 

82  (32^  And  there  went  along  with  him  two  others, 
malefactors,  to  be  crucified. 

88  And  when  thev  came  to  a  certain  place  which  is 
called  a  Skull,^  they  crucified  him  there;  and  the 
two  male&ctors,  the  one  on  his  right  hano,  and  the 

84  other  on  his  left.  (34)  And  Jesus  said:  Father, 
forgive  them;  for  tney  know  not  what  they  do. 
And  thev  divided  his  garments,  casting  a  lot  upon 

85  them.  (85)  And  the  people  stood  and  looked  on ; 
and  the  nuersff  also  dended  him,  and  said:  He 
(juickened^  others ;  let  him  quicken  himself  if  he 

86  is  the  Messiah,  the  chosen  of  GFod.  (86)  And  the 
soldiers  likewise  mocked  him,  coming  to  him  and 

87  offering  him  vinegar,  (87)  and  saymg  to  him: 
If  thou  art  the  king  of  the  Jews,  quicken'  thysel£ 


•Sy.loliO 


'Sy. 


»Sy.  ]jQoJ) 
1"  Gr.  i(fu(f9. 


iGc^fiTM 


Digitized  by 


Google 


160 


LUKE,   XXIIL 


'  or  9arA. 


(88)  And  there  was  likewise  a  superscription  over  88 
liim,  written  in  Greek,  and  Latin,  and  Hebrew: 
Tms  IS  THE  Ejkg  of  the  Jews. 

And  one  of  the  malefactors  who  were  crucified  39 
with  him,    reproached    him,   and  said:   If  thou 
art  the  Messiah,  rescue  thyself  and  rescue  us. 

OJ  But  his  fellow  [malefactor]  rebuked  him,  and  40 
said  to  him :  Art  thou  not  afiraid  even  of  God,  see- 
ing thou  art  under  the  same  sentence?    (41)  And  41 
we  justly ;  for  we  have  a  retribution  according  to 
our  deserts,  and  according  to  our  deeds;  but  noth- 
ing hateful  hath  been  done  by  him.    (42)  And  he  42 
said  to  Jesus :  My  Lord,  remember  me,  when  thou 
comest  into  thy  langdom.    (43)  Jesus  said  to  him:  43 
Verily  I  say  to  you,  That  this  day  thou  shalt  be 
with  me  in  paradise.*^ 

And  it  was  about  the  sixth  hour;  and  darkness  44 
was  over  all    the    land,^   until  the   ninth  hour. 
(45)  And  the  sun  was  darkened,  and  the  curtain  of  45 
the  door  of  the  temple  was  rent  through  its  mid- 
dle.   (46)  And  Jesus  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  46 
said :  My  Father,  into  thjr  hand  I  commit  my  spirit.™ 
Thus  he  spake,  and  expired.    (47)  And  when  the  47 
centurion  saw  what  occurred,  he  glorified  God, 
and  said:   Certainly,  this  was  a  righteous  man. 
(48)  And  aU  the  multitudes  who  had  assembled  at  48 
this  spectacle,  on  seeing  what  occurred,  returned, 
smiting  upon  their  breasts.    (49)  And  there  were  49 
standing  at  a  distance,  all  they  that  knew  Jesus, 
and  those  women  who  came  with  him  from  Galilee; 
and  they  beheld  these  things. 

And  there  was  a  certain  man,  whose  name  was  50 
Joseph,  a  counsellor, «» fi:om  Eamath  a  city  of  Judaea, 
who  was  a  good  man  and  righteous;  (51)  and  he  51 
had  not  consented  to  their  decision  and  deed;  and 
he  was  waiting  for  the  kingdom  of  God.    (52)  This  52 
man  went  to  rilate,  and  begged  the  body  of  Jesus. 
(53)  And  he  took  it  down,  and  wrapped  it  in  a  58 
winding-sheet  of  linen ;  and  laid  it  in  an  excava- 
ted sepulchre,  in  which  no  one  had  hitherto  been 
laid.     (54)  And  it  was  the  day  of  preparation,  54 
and  the  sabbath  began  to  dawn.    (55)  And  those  55 
women  who  came  with  him  firom  Qulilee,  approach- 
ed, and  viewed  the  sepulchre,  and  the  manner  in 
which  the  body  was  deposited.    (56)  And  they  5ft 
returned,  and  prepared  perfumes  and  aromatics: 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XXIV. 


161 


and  ihey  rested  on  the  sabbath,  as  it  is  command 
ed. 

XXrV.    And  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  in  the 

.morning,  while  it  was  yet  oark,  they  came  to  the 

sepulchre,  and  brought  the  aromatics  they  had 

prepared.    And   there  were  other  women  with 

2  them.    (2)  And  the/ found  the  stone  rolled  fix)m 

8  the  sepulchre.    (8)  And  thev  entered,  and  found 

4  not  the  body  of  Jesus.  (4)  And  as  they  wondered 
at  this,  behold,  two  men  stood  opposite  them ;  and 

5  their  raiment  was  eflPulgent  (5)  And  they  were 
in  fear,  and  bowed  their  &ces  to  the  ground.  And 
the  men  said  to  them:  Why  seek  ye  the  living 

6  among  the  dead?    (6)  He  is  not  here ;  he  is  risen. 
^  Bemember  how  he  conversed  with  you,  when  he 

7  was  in  (Jalilee,  (7)  and  said,  That  the  Son  of  man 
was  to  be  delivered  into  the  hands  of  sinM  men, 
and  to  be  crucified,  and  to  rise  on  the  third  day. 

8  (8)  And  thev  remembered  his  words. — (9)  And 

9  they  returned,  firom  the  sepulchre,  and  related  all 
these   thines   to    the    eleven,   and  to   the   rest 

10  (10)  Now  they  were  Mary  Magdalena,  and  Joan- 
na,* and  Mary  the  mother  of  James,  and  the  others 
with  them,  who  related  these  things  to  the  Ijegates.^ 

11  (11)  And  these  words  appeared  in  their  eyes  as 

12  oreams:  and  they  believed  them  not.  (12)  But 
Simon  arose,  and  ran  to  the  sepulchre,  and  looked 
in,  and  saw  the  linen  lying  by  itself:  and  he  went 
away  wondering  in  himseu  at  what  had  occurred. 

18  ^d  lo,  two  of  them,  on  the  same  day,  were 
going  to  a  vills^e  named  Emmaus,^'  distant  sixty 

14  mrlongs^  from  Jerusalem.    (14)  Aiid  they  talked 

15  together  of  all  that  had  occuired.  (IB)  And  as 
they  conversed,  and  questioned  each  otner,  Jesus 
came,   and  drew  near,   and  walked  with  them. 

16  (16)  And  their  eyes  were  held,  that  they  did  not 

17  recognize  him.  (IT)  And  he  said  to  them :  What  are 
these  discourses,  which  ye  hold  with  each  other,  as 

18  ye  walk  and  are  sad  ?  (18)  And  one  of  them,  whose 
name  was  Cleopas,®  answered  and  said  to  him :  Art 
thou  only  a  stranger  in  Jerusalem,  that  thou  know- 
est  not  the  things  that  have  occurred  there  in  these 

19  days?  (19)  He  said  to  them:  What  things?  They 
sav  to  him:  In  regard  to  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  a  man 
wno  was  a  prophet,  and  mighty  in  discourse  and 


Sy. 
**  or,  Apotiln, 


Sy. 

Gr.  0*70^10. 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


162 


liUKE,   XXIV. 


21 
22 


24 


26 


in  action,  before  God,  and  before  all  the  people. 

(20)  And  the  chief  priests  and  Elders  delivered  20 
him  up  to  a  sentence  of  death,  and  crucified  him. 

(21)  But  we  expected  that  he  was  to  deliver  IsraeL 
And  lo,  three  oays  Piave  passed],  since  all  these 
things  occurred.  (22)  And  moreover,  certain 
women  of  ours  astonished  us ;  for  they  went  early 
to  the  sepulchre ;  (23)  and  as  they  did  not  find  the  23 
body,  they  came  and  said  to  us :  We  saw  angels 
iJiere,  and  they  said  that  he  is  alive.  (24)  And 
also  some  of  us  went  to  the  sepulchre ;  and  they 
found,  as  the  women  reported ;  but  him  they  saw 
not— (25)  Then  Jesus  said  to  them :  0  deficient  in 
understanding,  and  slow  of  heart  to  believe  all  the 
things  that  the  prophets  uttered.  (26)  Were  not  26 
these  things  to  be ;  that  the  Mesaiiah  should  suffer, 
and  that  he  should  enter  into  his  glory  ?  (27)  Theu  27 
he  began  from  Moses,  and  from  all  the  prophets,  and 
expounded  to  them  concerning  himself  from  all  the 
scriptures.  (28)  And  they  drew  near  to  the  vil- 
lage to  which  they  were  going ;  and  he  made  them 
feel,  as  if  he  would  go  to  a  more  distant  place, 
(29)  And  they  urged  him,  and  said  to  him:  Tarry 
with  us,  for  the  day  inclineth  towards  dark.  And 
he  went  in  to  remain  with  them.  (30)  And  it 
occurred,  while  he  reclined  with  them,  that  he  took 
bread,  and  blessed,  and  brake,  and  gave  to  them. 

(31)  And  instantly,  their  eyes  were  opened,  and  31 
they  knew  him.    And  he  took  himself  from  theuL 

(32)  And  they  said  one  to  another:  Did  not  our  82 
heart  burn*  within  us,  while  he  talked  with  us  by  . 
the  way,   and  explained  to  us  the  scriptures?— 

(33)  And  they  arose,  the  same  hour,  and  returned  33 
to  Jerusalem.    And  they  found  the  eleven  assem- 
bled, and  those  with  them,  (34)  who  were  saying:  34 
Certainly,  our  Lord  hath  risen ;  and  he  hatn  ap- 
peared to  Simon.    (35)  And  they  also  related  what  85 
occurred  by  the  way,  and  how  he  became  known 

to  them,  when  he  broke  bread. 

And  while  they  were  talking  of  these  things,  86 
Jesus  stood  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  said  to  them : 
Peace   be  with   youl     It  is  I;    be  not   afraid. 


28 


29 
30 


*  l%e  printed  copies  read,  ^  ^rs  >  ]o01,  was  burning;  but  an  old  MS.  at 
OroomSah  reads,  |  ^rs  >  '\oo\  was  heavy,  or  dull. — PerkirCs  Residence  in  Persia^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


LUKE,   XXIV. 


168 


87  (87)  And  they  were  in  trepidation  and  fear,  for 

88  they  supposed  they  saw  a  spirit/  (88)  Jesus  said 
to  them:   Why  are  ye  agitated?    And  why  do 

89  imaginations?  arise  in  your  hearts?  (89)  Look  at 
my  hands  and  my  feet,  that  it  is  myself  Handle 
me,  and  know;  for  a  spirit^  hath  not  flesh  and 

40  bones,  as  ye  see  me  have.  (40)  And  as  he  said 
thus,   he  showed  them  his  hands  and  his  feet 

41  (41)  And  while  they  still  believed  not,  for  their 
joy,  and  were  astonished ;  he  said  to  them :  Have 

42  ye  here  any  thing  to  eat?  (42)  And  they  gave 
him  a  piece  of  broiled  fish,  and  of  honeycomb. 

48  (48^    And    he    took,     [and]    ate    before    thenu* 

44  (44)  And  he  said  to  them :  These  are  the  things^ 

which  I  said  to  you  while  I  was  with  you,  That  all 

things  written  of  me,  in  the  law  of  Moses  and  in 

the  prophets  and  in  the  psalms,  must  be  fulfilled. 

46  (46)  Then  he  opened  their  mind  to  understand  the 

46  scnptures.  (46)  And  he  said  to  them:  Thus  it 
is  written,  and  thus  it  was  right^  for  Messiah  to 
suffer,  and  rise  from  the  dead  on  the  third  day; 

47  (47)  and  that,  in  his  name,  repentance  for  the  re- 
mission of  sins  should  be  preached  among  all 
nations,  and  that  the  commencement  be  at  Jeru- 

48  salem.     (48)  And  ye  are  the  witnesses  of  these 

49  things.  (49)  And  I  will  send  upon  you  the  promise 
of  my  Father.  But  remain  ye  at  Jerusalem,  until 
ye  shall  be  clothed  with  enerCT"*  from  on  high. 

60  And  he  led  them  out  as  far  as  Bethany,  and 

61  lifted  his  hands,  and  blessed  them.  (61)  And 
it  occurred,  while  he  blessed  them,  that  ne  was 
separated  from  them,   and  ascended  to  heaven. 

62  ^2)  And  they  worshipped  him,  and  returned  to 
68  Jerusalem  with  great  joy.   (68)  And  they  were  oon- 

tmually  in  the  temple,  praising  and  blessing  God. 

Amen. 


CSoMfilefiofi  ffikt  holy  Chspe^  of  Luke  the  Evangelist?* 


'  Sy.  ViCJ 
'  or,  thoughts 
^  Sy.  VwOf 


>    Sy.  their  eyes 
^  or,  words. 


Sy.  ^jl 


-Sy.fl*^ 


Sy. 
Sy. 


■c  J---' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


\^]o    ^^lo;    ]\OiD    ^i^Q^y    ]Lo\o^    l^a^r^    ^^jA^oI 

The  Holy  Gospel,  the  Proclamation  of  John  the  Herald; 

which  he  ottered  and  proelaimed,  in  Greek,  at  Ephesns. 


^  Sy.  lAi:^ 
^  Sy.  l5cnQJ 


•  8y.]i4lia^ 
'Sy.O^Zl 
ff  Sy.  JJLA^ 
^Sy. 

locn  lixoo 

*   Sy.     (jy  ■    »  »     I 

kSy.  ]mr>Vni 

^Sy.l5fr* 


In  the  be^nning,a  was  the  Word;**  and  the 
Word  was  with  Qod;  and  the  Word  was  Gtod. 
(2)  He  was  in  the  beginning  with  Gk)d.  (S)  Every 
thing  was  by  his  hand ;  and  without  him,  was  not 
any  thing  whatever  that  existed.  (4)  In  him  was 
life ;«  and  the  life  was  the  light^  of  man.  (5)  And 
this  light  shineth  in  the  darkness ;  and  the  dark* 
ness  apprehended  it  not.— (6)  There  was  a  man 
sent  from  God,  whose  name  was  John.  (7)  He 
came  for  testimony,  to  bear  witness  concerning  the 
light.  (8)  He  was  not  himself  the  light,  but  [came] 
to  bear  witness  concerning  the  light— (9)  The  true 
light  was  that,  which  enlightenem  every  man  who 
Cometh  into  the  world.  (10)  He  was  in  the  world ;  10 
and  the  world  was  by  his  hand;  and  the  world  did 
not  know  him.  (11)  He  came  to  his  own  [people] ; 
and  his  own  [people]  received  him  not.  (12)  But 
such  as  received  him,  to  them  gave  he  the  pre- 
rogative®  to  be  children  of  God ;  [even]  to  them 
that  believe  on  his  name ;  (18)  who  are  bom,^  not  18 
of  blood,  nor  of  the  pleasure?  of  the  flesh,  nor  of 
the  pleasure  of  man,  but  of  Gtod. — (14)  And  the  14 
Word  became  flesh,^  and  tabernacled  with  us: 
and  we  saw  his  glory,  a  glory  as  of  the  only  be- 
gotten' from  the  Father,  that  he  was  full  of  grace 
and  truth.  (15)  John  testified  of  him,  and  cried, 
and  said:  This  is  he,  of  whom  I  said.  That  he 
Cometh  after  me,  and  is  before  me;  for  he  was 
prior  to  me.  (16)  And  of  his  plenitude  have  we  16 
all  received,  and  grace  for  grace.  (17)  For  the  17 
lawk  was  given  by  the  hand  of  Moses ;  but  the 
reality^  and  grace  was  by  the  hand  of  Jesus  Mes- 


11 
12 


15 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN  I. 


165 


19 
20 
21 
22 


18  cdah.  (18)  No  man  hath  ever  seen  God ;  the  only 
begotten  (Jod,  he  who  is  in  the  bosom  of  his  Father, 
he  hath  declared  [him]. 

And  this  is  the  testimony  of  John,  when  the 
Jews  of  Jerusalem  sent  to  him  priests  and  Levites, 
to  ask  him,  Who  art  thou?  (20)  And  he  confessed, 
and  denied  not,  but  confessed :  I  am  not  the  Mes- 
siah. (21)  And  they  asked  him  again :  Who  then  ? 
Art  thou  Elijah  ?  And  he  said :  I  am  not.  Art 
thou  a  prophet?  And  he  said,  No.  (22)  And 
they  said  to  him:  Who  art  thou?  that  we  may 
give  answer  to  them  that  sent  us.    What  sayest 

23  thou  of  thyself?  (23)  He  said :  I  am  the  voice  of 
one  crying  in  the  wilderness.  Make  smooth  the 
way  of  the  Lord;  as  said  the  prophet  Isaiah. 
(24)  And  they  who  were  sent,  were  of  the  Phari- 
sees. (25)  And  they  asked  him,  and  said  to  him : 
Why  then  baptizest™  thou,  if  thou  art  not  the 
Messiah,  nor  Illijah,  nor  a  prophet?  (26)  John 
answered,  and  said  to  them ;  I  baptize  with  water ; 
but  among  you  standeth  one,  whom  ye  do  not 
know.  (2?)  He  it  is  that  cometh  after  me,  and 
was  before  me,  whose  shoe-strings  I  am  not  worthy 
to  untie.  (28)  These  things  occurred  in  Bethany,"* 
where  John  was  baptizing.— (29)  The  day  after, 
John  saw  Jesus  coming  towards  him,  and  said: 
Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God,  that  beareth  the  sin  of 
the  world.  (30)  This  is  he  of  whom  I  said.  After 
me  cometh  a  man,  who  is  before  me,  for  he  was 

Erior  to  me,  (31)  And  I  knew  him  not ;  but  that 
e  might  be  known  to  Lffael,  therefore  am  I  come 
baptizing  with  water.  (32)  And  John  testified, 
and  said:  I  saw  the  Spirit  descend  from  heaven, 
as  a  dove,o  and  rest  upon  him.  (33)  And  I  did 
not  know  him;  but  he  who  sent  me  to  baptize 
with  water,  he  said  to  me :  On  whom  thou  seest 
the  Spirit  descend,  and  rest  upon  him,  he  baptizeth 
with  the  Holy  Spirit.  (34)  And  I  saw;  and  I 
testify,  that  tms  is  the  Son  of  God. 

And  the  next  day,  John  was  standing,  and  two 
86  of  his  disciples.  (36)  And  he  looked  upon  Jesus 
as  he  walked,  and  said :  Behold,  the  Lamb  of  God 
(37^  And  his  two  disciples  heard  him  when  he 
said  [it],  and  they  went  after  Jesus.  (38)  And  Je- 
sus turned,  and  saw  them  coming  after  him,  and  he 
said  to  them :  What  seek  ye  ?    They  said  to  him : 

Digitized  by 


24 
25 

26 


27 

28 
29 


SO 
31 
32 


33 


84 
86 


87 
88 


"  Sy. 

All  ^oiUi 


Sy. 


Sy. 


Google 


166 


p  Sy.^jiAAJulO 


.-i-^ 


I 


'  By.  truly  a  son 
cf  Israel, 


■Sy. 


•Sy.U-6^ 


"  Sy.  ^.aI^) 
«e  I^t.  quad- 
rantalia,  or 
amphont; 
winejars. 


JOHN,   IL 

Our  Rabbi,  where  stayest  thou?    (39)  He  said  to  89 
them :  Come,  and  see.    And  they  came  *and  saw 
where  he  lodged;  and  they  were  with  him  that 
day,  for  it  was  about  the  tenth  hour.    (40)  And  40 
one  of  those  who  heard  John  and  went  after  Jesus, 
was  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Simon.    (41)  He  first  41 
saw  Simon  his  brother,  and  said  to  him :  We  have 
found  the  Messiah.?    (42)  And  he  brought  him  to  42 
Jesus.     And  Jesus  looked  upon,  him,  and  said: 
Thou  art  Simon  the  son  of  4]^^ ;  thou  shalt  be 
called  Cephas. — (43)  The  next  day,  Jesus  was  dis-  43 
posed  to  depart  for  Galilee :  and  he  found  Philip, 
and  said  to  him,  Come  after  me.    (44)  And  Philip  44 
was  of  Bethsaida,  the  city  of  Andrew  and  Simon. 
(^)  And  Philip  found  Nathaniel,  and  said  to  him:  45 
We  have  found  him,  of  whom  Moses  wrote  in  the 
law,  and  the  prophets,  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph,  who 
is  of  Nazareth.    (46)  Nathaniel  said  to  him:  Can  46 
there  be  any  good  thing  from  Nazareth?  Philip 
said  to  him :  Come,  and  see.    (47)  And  Jesus  saw  47 
Nathaniel  coming  towards  him,  and  said  of  him: 
Behold,  a  real  firaeljte,'  in  whom  is  no  deceit 

(48)  Nathaniel  said  to  him:  Whence  knowest  thou  48 
me  ?    Jesus  said  to  him :  Before  Philip  called  thee, 
when  thou  wast  under  the  fig-tree,  I  saw  thee. 

(49)  Nathaniel  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Eabbi,  49 
thou  art  the  Son  of  God  ;■  thou  art  the  King  of 
Israel.    (50)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Because  I  said  to  50 
thee,  that  I  saw  thee  under  the  fig-tree,  believest 
thou?    Thou  wilt  see  greater  things  than  these. 
(61)  He  said  to  him :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  51 
That  hereafter  ye  will  see  neaven  opened,  and  the 
angels  of  God  ascending  and  descending  unto  the 
Son  of  man. 

And  on  the  third  day  there  was  a  feast  in  Cana,»  EL 
a  city  of  Galilee :   and  the  mother  of  Jesus  was 
there.    (2)  And  also  Jesus  and  his  disciples  were    2 
invited  to  the  feast     (3)  And  the  wine  fell  short:     8 
and  his  mother  said  to  Jesus :  They  have  no  wine. 
(4)  Jesus  said  to  her:  What  is  [in  common]  to  me    4 
and  thee  ?    Not  vet  hath  my  hour  come.     (5)  His    5 
mother  said  to  the  waiters :  Whatever  he  saith  to 
you,  do  [it].    (6)  And  there  were  there  six  water-    6 
pots  of  stone,  set  for  the  purification  of  Jews,  con- 
taining each  two  or  three  quadrantalia.**    (7)  Jesus    7 


V 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XL 


167 


said  to  them:   Fill  those  water-pots  i/irith  water. 

8  And  they  filled  them  to  the  top.  (8)  He  said  to 
them :  Draw  now,  and  carry  to  the  master*^  of  the 

9  feast  And  they  carried.  (9)  And  when  the  mas- 
ter of  the  feast  tasted  the  water  that  had  become 
wine,  and  did  not  know  whence  it  came,  (although 
the  waiters  knew,  as  they  had  filled  the  pots  with 
water,)  the  master  of  the  feast  called  the  bride- 

10  groom,  (10)  and  said  to  him:  Every  man  first 
bringeth  forward  the  good  wine,  and  when  they 
are  satiated,  then  that  which  is  inferior;  but  thou 

11  hast  kept  the  good  wine  till  now.  (11)  This  is  the 
first  sign,d  which  Jesus  wrought  at  Cana  in  Galilee, 
and  manifested  his  glory:  and  his  disciples  be- 
lieved on  him. 

12  Afterwards  he  went  down  to  Capernaum,  he  and 
his  mother  and  his  brothers  and  his  disciples ;  and 

18  they  were  there  a  few  days.  (13)  And  the  pass- 
over  of  the  Jews  drew  near ;  and  Jesus  went  up  to 

14  Jerusalem.  (14)  And  he  found  in  the  temple  those 
who  sold  beeves  and  sheep  and  doves,  and  the 

16  money-changers  sitting  [there].  (16)  And  he  made 
himself  a  whip  fi:om  a  cord,  and  turned  them  all 
out  of  the  temple,  and  the  sheep  and  the  beeves 
and  the  money-changers ;  and  he  pQ^cgdJ^uLtheir 

16  money,  and  overset  their  tables:  (16)  and  he  said 
to  thiem  that  sold  doves,  Take  away  these  things; 
and  make  not  my  Father's  house  a  house  of  traffic 

17  (17)  And  his  disciples  remembered,  that  it  is  writ- 
ten: The  zeal  of  thy  house  hath  devoured  me. 

18  (18)  But  the  Jews  replied,  and  said  to  him :  What 
sign  showest  thou  to  us,  since  thou  doest  these 

19  things  ?  (19)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them : 
Demolish  this  temple,  and  in  three  days  I  will 

20  again  erect  it  (20)  The  Jews  said  to  him :  Fortv 
and  six  vears,  this  temple  was  building ;  and  wilt 

21  thou  build  it  again  in  three  days?    (21)  But  he 

22  spake  of  the  temple  of  his  body.®  (22^  And  when 
he  was  arisen  from  the  dead,  his  disciples  remem- 
bered, that  he  spoke  this:  and  they  believed 
the  scriptures,  and  the  word  that  Jesus  spake. — 

23  (28)  And  while  Jesus  was  in  Jerusalem,  at  the 
feast  of  the  passover,  many  believed  on  him,  be- 

24  cause  they  saw  the  signs  he  wrought.  (24)  But 
Jesus  did  not  confide  himself  to  them ;  because  he 

25  knew  all  men :  (26)  And  he  needed  not  that  any 


Sf.  Ul 


Digitized  by 


Google 


168 


Sf .  IjosV) 


«Sy. 


*  Sy.  Vwoi 

•  Sy.  iwOJ 


»Sy. 
^Sy.L 


»   Sy.  by  his 
hand. 


JOHIV,   III. 

one  should  testify  to  him  respectmg  any  man;  for 
he  himself  knew  what  is  in  man. 

And  there  was  a  man  of  the  Pharisees  there,  IIL 
whose  name  was  Nicodemus,  a  ruler»  of  the  Jews. 
(2)  And  he  came  to  Jesus  by  night,  and  said  to    2 
him :  Babbi,  we  know  that  thou  art  a  teacher  sent 
from  Grod ;  for  no  one  can  work  those  signs  which 
thou  workest,  unless  Gkxi  be  with  him.    (8)  Jesus    8 
replied,  and  said  to  him:  Verily,  V^erily,  1  say  to 
thee,  That,  unless  a  man  be  bom*>  anew,®  he  can- 
not behold  the  kingdom  of  Otxi    (4)  Nicodemus    4 
said  to  him:  How  can  an  old  man  be  bom?    Can 
he  enter  a  second  time  into  his  mother's  womb, 
and  be  born  ?    (5)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  him :    6 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  thee,  That,  unless  a  man  be 
bom  of  water  and  the  Spirit,  he  cannot  enter  the 
kingdom  "of  God.    (6)  That  which  is  bom  of  the 
flesh,  is  flesh;  and  that  which  is  born  of  the  Spirit, 
is  spirit    (7)  Be  not  surprised  that  I  said  to  thee. 
Ye  must  be  bom  anew.    (8)  The  wind^  bloweth, 
where  it  chooseth;  and  thou  hearest  its  sound,  but 
knowest  not  whence  it  cometh,  and  whither  it 
goeth :  so  is  every  one,  that  is  born  of  the  Spirit® 
(9)  Nicodemus  answered,  and  said  to  him:  How 
can  these  thin^  be?    (10)  Jesus  answered,  and  10 
said  to  him:  Art  thou  a  teacher^  of  Israel,  and 
knowest  not  these  things?    (11)  Verily,  verily,  I  11 
say  to  thee:  We  speak,  what  we  know;  and  we 
testify  to  what  we  have  seen ;  but  ye  receive  not 
our  testimony.    (12)  If  I  have  spoken  to  you  of  12 
things  on  earth,  and  ye  believe  not;  how  will  ye 
believe,  if  I  speak  of  things  in  heaven?    (13)  And  18 
no  one  hath  ascended  to  heaven,  but  he  that  de- 
scended firom  heaven,  the  Son  of  man  who  is  in 
heaven.    (14)  And  as  Moses  elevated  the  serpent  14 
in  the  wilderness,  so  must  the  Son  of  man  be  bfted 
up:  (15)  that  everv  one  who  believeth  in  him,  15 
mav  not    perish,    but   may  have   life    eternal.? 

(16)  For  Grod  so  loved  the  world,  that  he  gave  his  16 
only  begotten^  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  on 
him,  should  not  perish,  but  should  have  life  eternal 

(17)  For  God  sent  not  his  Son  into  the  world,  to  17 
condemn  the  world ;  but  that  the  world  might  live 
by  meansi  of  him.    (18)  He  that  believeth'  on  him,  18 
is  not  condemned;  but  he  that  believeth  not^  is 


9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,  IIL 


169 


19 


21 


23 


24 
26 

26 


27 

28 
29 


84 


86 
36 


already  condemned;  because  he  hath  not  believed 
on  the  name  of  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God. 
(19)  And  this  is  the  [ground  of]  condemnation, 
that  light  hath  come  into  the  world,  and  men  have 
loved  darkness  rather  than  light,  for  their  deeds 
have  been  evil.  (20)  For  every  one  that  doeth 
abominable  things,  hateth  the  tight,  and  cometh 
not  to  the  light,  lest  his  deeds  should  be  reproved. 
(21)  But"  he  that  doeth  right,  ^  cometh  to  the  light, 
that  his  works  may  be  known  to  be  done  in  God. 
After  these  things;  came  Jesus  and  his  disciples 
into  the  land  of  Judsea ;  and  there  he  abode  with 
them,  and  baptized.  (23)  And  John  also  was 
baptizing  in  iEnon,^  which  is  near  to  Salim,"*  be- 
cause there  were  many  waters  there:  and  the 
people  came,  and  were  baptized.  (24)  For  John 
had  not  yet  fidlen  into  pnson. — (25)  And  one  of 
John's  disciples  and  a  certain  Jew  had  disputed 
respectinff  purification.— ^6)  And  they  came  to 
John,  and  said  to  him:  Our  Eabbi,  he  who  was 
with  thee  beyond  Jordan,  and  of  whom  thou  gavest 
testimony,  lo,  he  also  baptizeth;  and  many  go  after 
him.  (27)  John  answered,  and  said  to  them:  A 
man  cannot  take  any  thing  by  his  own  choice,  un- 
less it  be  given  him  from  heaven.  (28)  Ye  are 
witnesses  for  me,  that  I  said :  I  am  not  the  Messiah, 
but  am  sent  to  go  before  him.  (29^  He  that  hath 
the  bride,  is  the  bridegroom :  ana  tne  friend  of  the 
bridegroom,  who  standeth  and  listeneth  to  him, 
rejoiceth  with  great  joy  on  accoimt  of  the  bride- 
groom's voice:  this  my  joy,  therefore,  lo,  it  is  ftilL 
(80^  To  him  must  be  mcrease,  and  to  me  decrease. 
(81)  For  he  that  cometh  from  above,  is  above  all ; 
ana  he  that  is  from  the  earth,  is  of  the  earth,  and 
talketh  of  the  earth.  He  that  cometh  from  heaven, 
is  above  all ;  (32)  and  what  he  hath  seen  and  heard, 
he  testifieth ;  and  his  testimony,  no  one  receiveth. 
(38)  But  he  that  receiveth  his  testimony,  hath  jset 
his  seal,  that  God  is  true.  (84)  For  he  whom  Gbd 
hath  sent,  speaketh  the  words  of  God;  for  God 
hath  not  mven  the  Spirit  by  measure  [to  him]. 
(35)  The  Father  loveth  the  Son,  and  hath  given 
every  thinffn  into  his  hands.  (86)  He  that  be- 
lieveth  on  me  Son,  hath  life  eternal ;  but  he  who 
obeyeth  not  the  Son,  shall  not  see  life,  but  the 
wrath  of  God  will  abide  upon  him. 


"Sy.  ^^>V^ 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


170 


JOHN.   IV. 


Sy.  »n« 


•Sy. 
Sy. 


3 

4 

6 
6 


10 


11 


And  Jesus  knew,  that  the  Pharisees  had  heard  TV. 
that  he  made  many  disciples,  and  baptized  more 
than  John.  (2)  Yet  Jesus  himself  did  not  baptize, 
but  his  disciples.  (8)  And  he  left  Judaea,  and 
went  again  into  Galilee.  (4)  And  in  going,  he  had 
occasion  to  pass  through  the  midst  of  the  Samari- 
tans. (5)  And  he  came  to  a  city  of  the  Samaritans 
called  Sychar,a  near  the  field  which  Jacob  saye  to 
his  son  Joseph.  (6)  And  Jacob's  well  of  water 
was  there.  And  Jesus  was  weary  with  the  toil  of 
travelling,  and  seated  himself  by  the  well :  and  it 
was  at  me  sixth  hour.  (7)  And  a  woman  from 
Samaria  came  to  draw  water.  And  Jesus  said  to 
her:  Qive  me  water  to  drink.  (8)  And  his  disci- 
i  had  gone  to  the  city,  to  buy  themselves  food. 
^9)  The  Samaritan  woman  said  to  him:  How  dost 
thou,  a  Jew,  ask  drink  of  me,  who  am  a  Samaritan 
woman?  For  the  Jews  have  no  familiarity  with 
Samaritans.  (10)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  her: 
If  thou  hadst  known  the  gift*»  of  Gbd,  and  who  it 
is  that  saith  to  thee.  Give  me  to  drink,  thou 
wouldest  have  asked  of  him,  and  he  would  have 
given  thee  living  waters.^  (11)  The  woman  said 
to  him:  My  lord,  thou  hast  no  bucket,  and  the 
well  is  deep;  how  hast  thou  living  waters? 
(12)  Art  thou  greater  than  our  father  Jacob,  who  12 
gave  us  this  well,  and  drank  from  it  himseli^  and 
his  children,  and  his  flocks  ?  (13)  Jesus  replied  13 
and  said  to  her:  Whoever  shall  drink  of  these 
waters,  will  thirst  again ;  (14)  but  whoever  shall 
drink  of  the  waters  which  I  shall  give  him,  will  not 
thirst  for  ever;  but  the  waters,  which  I  shall  give 
him,  will  be  in  him  a  fountain  of  waters,  springing 
up  unto  life  eternal.  (15)  The  woman  said  to  him: 
My  lord,  give  me  of  these  waters,  that  I  may  not 
thirst  again,  and  may  not  come  to  draw  from  here. 
(16)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Go,  call  thy  husband,  and  16 
come  hither.  (17)  She  said  to  him :  I  have  no  17 
husband.  Jesus  said  to  her :  Thou  hast  well  said, 
I  have  no  husband ;  (18)  for  thou  hast  had  five  18 
husbands,  and  he  whom  thou  now  hast,  is  not  thy 
husband.  In  this  thou  didst  speak  truly.  (19)  The  19 
woman  said  to  him :  My  lord,  I  perceive  thou  art 
a  prophet  (20)  Our  fathers  worshipped  in  this  20 
mountain  J  but  ye  say,  that  in  Jerusalem  is  the 
place  where  it  is  proper  to  worship.    (21)  Jesus  21 


14 


16 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   IV. 


171 


said  to  her :  Woman,  believe  ine,  the  hour  cometh, 
when  neither  in  this  mountain,  nor  in  Jerusalem, 

22  ye  will  worship  the  Father.  (22)  Ye  worship,  ye 
know  not  what ;  but  we  worship  what  we  know ; 

23  for  life**  is  from  the  Jews.  (23)  But  the  hour 
Cometh,  and  now  is,  when  the  true  worshippers 
will  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  in  truth ;  for 
the  Father  recjuireth  that  worshippers  be  such. 

24  (24)  For  God  is  a  Spirit;  and  they  that  worship 
26  him,  should  worship  in  spirit  and  in  truth.   (25)  The 

woman  said  to  him:    1  know  that  Messiah  will 
come ;  and  when  he  cometh,  he  will  teach  us  every 

26  thing.    (26)  Jesus  said  to  her:  I,  who  talk  with 

27  thee,  am  he.— (27)  And  while  he  was  speaking,  his 
disciples  came.  And  they  wondered  that  he  would 
converse  with  the  woman ;  yet  no  one  said,  What 
seekest  thou?    or.  Why  talkest  thou  with  her? 

28  (28)  And  the  woman  left  her  water-pot,  and  went 

29  to  the  city,  and  said  [to  the  people] :  (29)  Come, 
see  a  man  that  told  me  every  thing  I  ever  did :  is 

SO  not  this  the  Messiah  ?    (30)  And  tne  people  went 

31  out  of  the  city,  and  came  to  nim. — (31J  in  tne  mean 

time,  his  disciples  entreated  him,  ana  said  to  him : 

82  Our  Eabbi,  eat.    (32)  But  he  said  to  them :  I  have 

53  food  to  eat,  of  which  ye  •are  ignorant.  (33)  The 
disciples  said  among  themselves:    Hath  any  one 

54  brought  him  something  to  eat  ?  (34)  Jesus  said  to 
them :  My  food  is  to  do  the  pleasure  of  him  that 

55  sent  me,  and  to  accomplish  his  work.  (3&)  Do  ye 
not  say,  that  after  four  months  cometh  the  narvest? 
Behola,  I  say  to  you,  and  lift  up  your  eyes,  and 
look  upon  the  grounds, «  that  they  are  white,  and 

36  have  already  come  to  the  harvest.  (36)  And  he 
that  reapeth,  receiveth  wages,  and  gathereth  fruits 
unto  life  eternal;  and  the  sower  and  the  reaper 

87  equally  rejoice.  (37)  For  in  this,  is  the  proverb^ 
true,  that  one  is  the  sower,  and  another  the  reaper. 

88  (38)  I  sent  you  to  reap  that,  on  which  ye  labored 
not:   for  others  toiled,  and  ye  entered  into  their 

89  labor. — (39)  And  many  Samaritans  of  that  city 
believed  on  him,  because  of  the  discourse  of  the 
woman,  who  testified.  He  told  me  all  that  I  ever 

40  did.  (40)  And  when  these  Samaritans  came  to 
him,  they  requested  him  to  tarry  with  them ;  and 

41  he  remained  with  them  two  days.    (41)  And  many 

42  believed  on  him,  because  of  his  discourse.  (42)  And 


^  Gr.  ^oif  iipio. 


or,  lands. 


'  Sy.  word. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


172 


Gr.  ^utriip. 


JOHN,    V^ 

they  cudd  to  the  woman :  Hencseforth  we  believe  in 
him,  not  on  account  of  thy  word;  for  we  have 
heard  him  ourselves,  and  we  know  that  he  truly  is 
the  Messiah,  the  lafe-GKver?  of  the  world. 

And  after  two  days  Jesus  departed  from  there,  48 
and  went  into  Galilee.     (44)  For  Jesus  himself  44 
testified,  that  a  prophet  is  not  honored  in  his  own 
city,     (45)   And  when  he  came  to  Galilee,  the  45 
Galileans  received  him,  having  seen  all  the  signs 
which  he  wrought  in  Jerusalem  at  the  feast ;  for 
they  too  had  gone  to  the  feast — (46)  And  Jesus  46 
came  again  to  Cana  of  Gulilee,  where  he  made  the 
water  wine.   And  there  was  at  Capernaum  a  king's 
servant,  whose  son  was  sick,    (47)  He  heard  that  47 
Jesus  had  come  from  Judaea  to  Galilee;  and  he 
went  to  him,  and  besought  him  that  he  would  come 
down  and  heal  his  son;  for  he  was  near  dying. 
(48)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Unless  ye  see  signs  and  48 
wonders,  ye  will  not  believe.     (49)  The  king's  49 
servant  said  to  him :  My  lord,  come  down,  before 
the  child  dieth.    (50)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Go,  thv  50 
son  liveth.  And  the  man  believed  the  word  which 
Jesus  spake  to  him,  and  went  away.    (51)  And  as  51 
he  was  going  down,  his  servants  met  him,  and  in- 
formed him  and  said  to  him:   Thy  son  livetlu 
(52)  And  he  asked  them,  at  what  time  he  recovered.  52 
And  they  said  to  him :  Yesterday,  at  the  seventh 
hour  the  fever  left  him.    (53)  And  his  fether  knew,  58 
that  it  was  at  the  hour  in  which  Jesus  said  to  him, 
Thy  son  liveth.     And  he  believed,  and  all  his 
house.    (54)  This  again  was  the  second  sim  that  54 
Jesus  wrought,  when  he  came  from  Judaea  to 
GaJilee. 


^  Sy.  much  peo-^ 
pie. 


After  these  things  there  was  a  feast  of  the  Jews, 
and  Jesus  went  up  to  Jerusalem.  (2)  And  there  was 
there  in  Jerusalem  a  certain  place  of  baptizing,* 
which  was  called  in  Hebrew  Bethesda;*»  and  there 
were  in  it  five  porches.  (8)  And  in  them  were  laid  a 
great  multitude®  of  the  sicl^  and  the  blind,  and  the 
lame,  and  the  withered,  waiting  for  the  moving  of 
the  waters.  (4)  For  an  angel,  from  time  to  time,  de- 
scended into  the  baptistery,  and  moved  the  waters; 
and  he  who  first  went  in,  after  the  moving  of  the 
waters,  was  cured  of  whatever  disease  he  had. 
1(5)  And  a  certain  man  was  there,  who  had  been 


V. 
2 


8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   V. 

6  diseased  thirty  and  eight  ^ears.  (6)  Jesus  saw 
him  lying,  and  knew  that  [his  diseasej  had  been  a 
long  time  upon  him,  and  said  to  him:  Desirest 

7  thou  to  be  healed  ?  (7)  And  the  sick  man  answered 
and  said :  Yes,  my  lord ;  but  I  have  no  one  who^ 
when  the  tirater  is  moved,  will  put  me  into  the 
baptistery;  but  while  I  am  commg,  another  de- 

8  soendeth  before  me.    (8)  Jesus  said  to  him :  Arise, 

9  take  up  thy  bed,  and  walk.  (9)  And  immediately^ 
the  man  was  healed;  and  he  arose,  took  up  lus 
bed,  and  walked;   and  it  was  the  sabbath  day. 

iO  (10)  And  the  Jews  said  to  him  that  was  healed: 
It  IS  the  sabbath ;  it  is  not  lawful  for  thee  to  b^ 

11  thy  bed.    (11)  But  he  answered,  and  said  to  them 
He  that  made  me  whole,  he  said  to  me.  Take  up 

12  ttiT  bed  and  walk.  (12)  And  they  asked  him: 
Who  is  the  man  that  said  to  thee.  Take  up  thy 

13  bed  and  walk  ?  (18)  But  the  man  that  was  healed, 
knew  not  who  it  was;  for  Jesus  had  slid  away, 
in  the  great  multitude   that  was  in  the  place. 

14  (14")  After  a  time,' Jesus  found  him  in  the  temple, 
ana  said  to  him :  Lo,  thou  art  healed ;  sin  not 
again,  lest  something  worse  come  upon  thee  than 

15  before.    (16)  And  the  man  went  and  told  the  Jews, 

16  that  it  was  Jesus  who  had  cured  him.  (16)  And 
for  this  cause  the  Jews  persecuted  Jesus,  and  sought 
to  kill  him ;  because  he  had  done  these  things  on 

17  the  sabbath.    (17)  But  Jesus  said  to  them:  My 

18  Father  worketh  until  now,  and  I  work.  (18)  And 
for  this,  the  Jews  soucht  the  more  to  kill  him,  not 
only  because  he  had  broken  the  sabbath,  but  be- 
cause he  had  said  of  God,  that  he  was  his  Father. 

19  and  had  equalled^  himself  with  God.  (19)  And 
Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:  Verily,  verily, 
I  say  to  you :  The  Son  can  do  nothinff  of  his  own 
pleasure,  but  what  he  seeth  the  Father  do :  for  what 
things  the  Father  doeth,  these  in  like  manner  doeth 

20  the  Son.  (20)  For  the  Father  loveth  his  Son,  and 
showeth  him  every  thing  he  doeth:  and  greater 
works  than  these,  will  he  show  him,  that  ye  may 

21  wonder.  (21)  For  as  the  Father  raiseth  the  dead, 
and  vivifieth  them ;  so  also  the  Son  vivifieth  whom 

22  he  pleaseth.  (22)  For  neither  doth  the  Father 
judge  any  one,  but  hath  given  all  judgment  to  the 

23  Son :  (28)  that  every  man  may  honor  the  Son,  as 
he  honoreth  the  Father.    He  that  honoreth  not  the 


178 


8j. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


174 


•  sy.  n4\«| 


Sy.  )^|^ 


^Sy.)^ 


JOHN,   V. 

Son^  honoreth  not  the  Father  that  sent  him. 
(24)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  ho  who  he^-  24 
eth  my  Word,  and  believeth  on  him  that  sent  me, 
hath  life  eternal,  and  will  not  come  into  condemna- 
tion, but  hath  passed  from  death  to  life.  (25)  Verily,  25 
verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  the  hour  cometn,  and  is 
even  now  come,  when  the  dead  will  hear  the  voice 
of  the  Son  of  God ;  and  they  that  hear,  will  live. 

(26)  For,  as  the  Father  hath  life  in  himself,  so  hath  26 
he  given  to  the  Son  also,  to  have  life  in  himself: 

(27)  and  hath  moreover  given  him  authority®  to  27 
execute  judgment.*   But  that  he  is  the  Son  of  man, 

(28)  wonder  not  at  this;   for  the  hour  cometh,  28 
when  all  that  are  in  their  graves  will  hear  his 
voice;  (29)  and  will  come  forth;  they  that  have  29 
done  good,  to  the  resurrection  of  life,  and  they 
that  have  done  evil,  to  the  resurrection  of  con- 
demnation.   (80)  I  can  do  nothing  of  my  own  80 
pleasure;  but  as  I  hear,  so  I  judge.     And  my 
judgment  is  just;  for  I  seek  not. my  own  pleasure, 
but  the  pleasure  of  him  that^  sent  me.     (81)  If  I  81 
should  bear  testimony  respecting  myself,  my  testi- 
mony would  not  be  valid.^    (82)  There  is  another  82 
that  beareth  testimony  concerning  me ;  and  I  know 
that  the  testimony  which  he  beareth  concerning 
me  is  true.    (83)  Ye  sent  unto  John ;  and  he  bore  88 
testimony  to  the  truth.     (84)  And  I  have  not  re-  84 
ceived  testimony  from  men:   but  these  things  I 
say,  that  ye  may  live.     (85)  He  was  a  burning  and  85 
shining  lamp ;  and  ye  were  willing  for  a  time,  to 
glory  in  his  light.     (36)  But  I  have  a  testimony,  86 
which  is  greater  than  that  of  John ;  for  the  works? 
which  my  Father  hath  given  me  to  accomplish, 
these  works  which  I  do,  testify  of  me  that  the 
Father  hath  sent  me.     (87)  And  the  Father  who  87 
sent  me,  he  testifieth  of  me.     Ye  have  not  at  any 
time  heard  his  voice,  nor  have  ye  seen  his  visage. 
(88)  And  his  word  abideth  not  in  you,  because  ye  88 
believe  not  in  him  whom  he  hath  sent.    (89)  Search  39 
the  scriptures ;  for  in  them,  ye  think,  there  is  life 


*  The  Svriac  punctuation  here  differs  from  the  Greek,  and  greatly  alters  the 
sense.  If  tne  Greek  punctuation  were  applied  to  the  Syriac,  this  and  the  follow- 
ing verse  might  be  rendered  thus: — (27)  ^and  hath  moreover  given  him  authority 
to  execute  judgment,  as  he  is  also  the  Son  of  man.  (28)  Marvel  not  at  this;  for 
the  hour  cometh,"  &c.  This  is  probably  the  true  rendering  of  the  passage ;  dnoe 
the  other  scarcely  makes  any  intelligible  sense. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   VI. 

40  eternal  for  you ;  and  they  testify  of  me.  (40)  And 
ye  are  unwilling  to  come  to  me,  that  life  eternal 

41  may  be  youi-s.    (41)  I  do  not  receive  glory  from 

42  men.    (42)  But  I  know  you,  that  the  love  of  God 
48  is  not  in  you.     (48)  I  came  in  the  name  of  mv 

Father,  and  ye  receive  me  not:  if  another  shaU 
come  in  his   own    name,   him  ye  will  receive. 

44  (44)  How  can  ye  believe,  who  receive  glory  from 
one  another,  and  seek  not  the  glory  which  cometh 

45  from  God  only  ?  (45)  Do  ye  suppose,  that  I  shall 
accuse  you  biefore  the  Father?  There  is  one  that 
will  accuse  you,  that  Moses,  on  whom  ye  rely. 

46  (46)  For,  if  ye  believed  Moses,  ye  would  also 
beheve   me;    for   Moses  wrote    concerning   Ine. 

47  (47J  But  if  ye  believe  not  his  writings,  how  will 
ye  Delieve  my  words? 

VX    After  these  things,  Jesus  went  to  the  other  side 

2  of  the  sea  of  Galilee  4;or]  of  Tiberias.*    (2)  And 

great  multitudes  went  after  him ;  because  they  had 

seen  the  signs**  which  he  wrought  upon  the  sick. 

8  (8)  And  Jesus  ascended  a  mountain,  and  there  he 

4  seated  himself  with  his  disciples.     (4)   And  the 

6  feast  of  the  Jewish  passover  was  near. — (5J  And 

Jesus  raised  his  eyes,  and  saw  a  great  multitude 

coming  towards  him;    and   he    said  to  Philip: 

Whence  shall  we  buy  bi*ead,  that  these  may  eat  ? 

6  (6^  And  this  he  said,  to  try  him ;   for  he  knew 

7  wnat  he  was  about  to  do.    (y)  Philip  said  to  him : 
Two  l^undred  deuarii  in  bread  would  not  suffice 

8  them,  that  each  might  take  but  a  little.  (8)  One  of 
his  disciples,  Andrew,  the  brother  of  Simon  Cephas, 

9  said  to  him:  (9)  There  is  a  lad  here,  who  hath 
with  him  five  cakes  of  barley,  and  two  fishes;  but 

10  what  are  these  for  all  those  [people]  ?  (10)  Jegus 
said  to  them:  Make  all  the  people  recline.  Now 
there  was  much  grass  in  that  place :  and  the  people 

11  reclined,  in  number  five  thousand.  (11)  And  Jesus 
took  the  bread,  and  blessed,  and  distributed  to  them 
that  reclined.   And  so  also,  with  the  fish ;  as  much 

12  as  they  desired.  (12)  And  when  they  were  satisfied, 
he  said  to  his  disciples :  Gather  up  the  fragments 

18  which  remain,  so  that  nothing  be  lost.  {IS)  And 
they  collected  and  filled  twelve  baskets,  witn  frag- 
ments of  what  remained  to  them  that  had  eaten  pf 

14  the  five  barley  cakes.— (14)   And  those  people, 


175 


Sy. 

'  Sy.  1Z5Z.1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


176 


JOHN,   VL 


Sy.  )aJL1o 


when  they  saw  the  sign  which  Jesus  had  wrought, 
said:  Certainly,  this  is  that  prophet  who  was  to 
come  into  the  world.  (15)  And  Jesus  knew,  that  16 
they  were  about  to  come  and  take  him  by  force, 
and  make  him  king:  and  he  retired  into  a  moun- 
tain alone. 

And  when  it  was  evening,  his  disciples  went  16 
down  to  the  sea,  (17)  and  sat  in  a  ship,  and  were  17 
going  over  to  Capernaum.  And  darkness  came  on, 
and  Jesus  had  not  come  to  them.    (18)  And  the  18 
sea  was  boisterous  against  them,  for  a  violent  wind 
was  blowing.    Q9)  And  they  had  gone  about  five  19 
and  twenty  or  thirty  ftirlongs,  when  they  saw  Jesus 
walking  upon  the  sea :  and  as  he  drew  near  to  the 
ship,  they  were  afiraid.     (20)  But  Jesus  said  to  20 
them :  It  is  I ;  be  not  afiraid.    (21)  And  thejr  were  21 
glad  to  receive  him  into  the  ship.    And,  directly, 
the  ship  was  at  the  land  to  which  they  were  going. 
— (22)  And  the  next  dajr,  tiie  multitude,  who  had  22 
renudned  on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  saw  that 
there  was  no  other  ship  there,  except  that  in  which 
the  disciples  embarked,  and  that  Jesus  did  not 
embark  m  that  ship  with  his  disciples;  (28)  yet  28 
that  other  ships  had  come  fix)m  Tioerias,  near  to 
the  place  where  they  ate  the  bread  when  Jesus 
blessed  [it].    (24)  And  when  the  multitude  saw,  24 
that  Jesus  was  not  there,  nor  his  disciples;  they 
embarked  in  ships,  and  came  to  Capernaum,  and 
sought  for  Jesus.— (26)  And  when  they  found  him  25 
on  the  other  side  of  the  sea,  they  said  to  hin^ :  Our 
Babbi,   when  earnest  thou  hither?      (26)    Jesus  26 
replied  and  said  to  them :  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
vou,  Ye  seek  me,  not  because  ye  saw  tiie  signs, 
but  because  ye  ate  the  bread  and  were  satisfied. 
(27)  Labor  not  for  the  food  that  perisheth,  but  for  27 
the  food  that  abideth  unto  life  eternal,  which  the 
Son  of  man  will  give  to  you ;  for  him  hath  God 
the  Father  sealed.    (28)  Thev  said  to  him:  What  28 
shall  we  do,  in  order  to  wort  the  works  of  Qtod  ? 
(29)  Jesus  replied  and  said  to  them :  This  is  the  29 
work  of  God,  that  ye  believe  on  him  whom  he  hath 
sent — (80)    They  say  to  him:   What  sign  doest  80 
thou,  that  we  may  see  and  believe  in  thee  r    What 
workest  thou  ?    (31)  Our  fathers  ate  the  manna,®  81 
in  the  wilderness;  as  it  is  written.  He  gave  them 
bread  firom  heaven  to  eat  (82)  Jesus  said  to  them:  82 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,  yi 


177 


Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  vou,  Moses  gave  yon  not 

the  bread  from  heaven;  but  my  Father  giveth  you 
33  the  real  bread  from  heaven.    (88)  For  the  bread 

of  Gtod  is,  he  that  xjame  down  from  heaven,  and 
S4  ^veth  life  to  the  world.  (84J  They  say  to  him : 
35  Our  Lord,  give  us  at  all  times  this  bread.  (36)  Jesus 

said  to  them:  I  am  the  bread  of  life:   he  that 

oometh  to  me,  shall  not  hanger;  and  he  that 
B6  believeth  on  me,  shall  not  thii-st,  for  ever.  (36)  But 

I  said  to  vou,  That  ye  have  seen  me,  ana  do  not 
87  believe.    (37)  All  that  my  Father  gave  me,  will 

come  to  me.:  and  him  that  cometh  to  me,  I  will 

38  not  cast  out.  (38)  For  I  came  down  from  heaven, 
not  to  do  my  own  pleasure,  but  the  pleasure  of 

39  him  that  sent  me.  (39)  And  this  is  tne  pleasure 
of  him  that  sent  me,  that  whatever  he  hath  given 
me,  I  should  lose  nothing  of  it,  but  should  raise  it 

40  up  at  the  last  day.  (40)  For  this  is  the  pleasure  of 
my  Father,  that  every  one  who  seeth  the  Son,  and 
believeth  on  him,  should  have  life  eternal ;  and  I 

41  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. — (41)  Then  the 
Jews  murmured  at  him,  because  he  said :  I  am  the 

42  bread,  who  have  descended  from  heaven.  (42)  And 
they  said :  Is  not  this  Jesus  the  son  of  Joseph, 
whose  father  and  mother  we  know?    And  how 

43  doth  he  say :  I  came  down  from  heaven  ?  (48)  Jesus 
replied  and  said  to  them :  Murmur  not,  one  with 

44  another.  (44)  No  man  can^  come  to  me,  unless 
the  Father  who  sent  me,  shall  draw®  ^^J  ^^^  ^ 

45  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day.  (45)  For  it  is 
written,  in  the  prophet:  And  tney  shall  all  be 
taught  of  God.  Whoever,  therefore,  heareth  from 
the  Father,  and  learneth  from  him,  cometh  to  me. 

46  (46)  Not  that  any  one  hath  seen  the  Father,  except 
him  who  hath  come  from  God ;  he  it  is,  hath  seen 

47  the  Father. — (47)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you: 
That,  to  him  who  believeth  in  me,  there  is  Kfe 

48  eternal.    (48^  I  am  the  bread  of  life.^    (49)  Your 

49  fathers  ate  tne  manna,  in  the  wilderness,  and  they 

50  died.  (50)  But  this  is  the  bread  which  cometh 
from  heaven,  that  a  man  may  eat  of  it,  and  not  die. 

51  (61)  I  am  the  bread  of  life,  who  have  come  down 
from  heaven :  and  if  a  man  shall  eat  of  this  bread, 
he  will  live  for  ever.  And  the  bread  which  I  shall 
give,  is  nw  body,?  which  I  give  for  the  life  of  the 

52  world. — (52)  Then  the  Jews  contended  one  with 


Sy. 


«  Sy.  u|.^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


L78 


JOHN,    VII. 


Sy.  >i^iD 


k  Sy.  iDord, 


Bj  ]<  ^fn 


63 


54 


61 
62 


another,  and  said :  How  can  lie  give  ns  his  body 
to  eat?  (58)  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Verily, 
verily,  1  say  to  you.  That,  unless  ye  eat  the  body  of 
the  Son  of  man,  and  drink  his  blood,  ye  have  no 
life  within  you.  (54)  But  he  that  eateth  of  mv 
body,  and  drinketh  of  my  blood,  to  him  is  lire 
eternal ;  and  I  will  raise  him  up  at  the  last  day. 
(55)  For  ray  body  truly  is  foocl,  and  my  blood  55 
truly  is  drink.  (56)  He  that  eateth  my  body,  and  66 
drinketh  my  blood,  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him. 
(57)  As  the  living  Father  hath  sent  me,  and  I  live  57 
because^  of  the  Father ;  so  he  that  shall  eat  me,  he 
also  will  live  because  of  me.  (58)  This  is  the  bread  68 
that  came  down  from  heaven :  not  as  your  fathers 
ate  the  manna,  and  died;  whoever  shall  eat  of  this 
bread,  will  live  for  ever. — (59)  These  things  he  59 
uttered  in  the  synagogue,  while  teaching  at  Caper- 
naum. (60)  And  many  of  his  disciples  who  heard  60 
jTiim],  said :  This  is  a  hard  speech,  who  can  hear 
it. — (61)  And  Jesus  knew  in  himself  that  his  dis- 
ciples murmured  at  this;  and  he  said  to  them. 
Doth  this  stumble  you?  (62)  If  then,  ye  were  to 
see  the  Sou  of  man  ascend,  to  where  he  was  from 
the  beginning ! — (63)  It  is  the  Spirit^hat  vivifieth ;  63 
the  body  profiteth  nothing.  The  words  which  I 
have  used  with  you,  they  are  spirit,  and  they  are 
life.  (64)  But  there  are  some  of  you,  that  believe  64 
not  For  Jesus  knew,  from  the  beginning,  who 
they  were  that  believed  not,  and  who  it  was  that 
would  betray  him.  (65)  And  he  said  to  them; 
For  this  reason,  I  said  to  you.  That  no  one  can> 
come  to  me,  unless  it  be  given  to  him  by  my 
Father.— (66)  On  account  of  this  speech,^^  manyi>f 
his  disciples  turned  back,  and  walked  not  with  nim. 
(67)  And  Jesus  said  to  the  twelve :  Are  ye  also 
disposed  to  go  away  ?  (68)  Simon  Cephas  replied, 
and  said:  My  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go?  The 
words  of  life  eternal  are  with  thee.  (69)  And  we 
believe,  and  know,  that  thou  art  the  Messiah,  the 
Son  of  the  living  Gtod.  (70)  Jesus  said  to  them : 
Have  not  I  chosen  you  twelve  ?  Yet  one  of  ;^ou 
is  a  devil.i  (71)  This  he  spoke  of  Judas  Iscariot, 
the  son  of  Simon ;  for  he  was  afterwards  to  betray 
him,  being  one  of  the  twelve. 


66 


66 

67 
68 

69 

70 

71 


After  these  things  Jesus  walked  in  Galilee ;  for  VII 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   VIL 


179 


he  would  not  walk  in  Judaea,  because  the  Jews 

2  sought  to  slay  him.^2)  And  the  Jewish  feast  of 

3  tabernacles  drew  near.     (3)  And  the  brothers*  of  ■  Sy.  di^a>j1 
Jesus  said  to  him :  Leave  here,  and  go  into  Judaea ; 
that  thy  disciples  may  see  the  works  thou  doest. 

4  (4)  For  there  is  no  one  who  doeth  any  thing  in 
secret,  while  he  wisheth  to  become  public. ,  If 
.thou  doest  these  ^things^  show  thyself  to  the  world. 
'6)  For^y^nlis  brothers  didjaotbeliey^inj^ 


6  (6)  Jesus  said  totEein  :^y  time  hatE  notyet  come : 

7  but  your  time  is  always  ready.     (7)  The  world 
cannot  hate  you,  but  me  it  hateth ;  because  I  testify 

8  of  i*,  that  its  deeds  are  evil.     (8)  Go  ye  up  to  the 
feast;  I  do  not  go  up  to  this  feast  now,  because  my 

9  time  is  not  yet  completed.    (9)  These  things  he 

10  said,  and  remained  still  in  Galilee.  (10)  But  when 
his  brothers  had  gone  up  to  the  feast,  then  he  also 
went  up,  not  openly,  but  as  it  were  secretly. — 

11  (11")  And  the  Jews  sought  for  him  at  the  feast; 

12  ana  they  said.  Where  is  he  ?  (12)  And  there  was 
much  altercation  among  the  people  respecting  him ; 
for  some  said,  He  is  a  good  man ;  while  others  said, 

13  No;  but  he  deceiveth  the  people.  (13)  Yet  no 
one  spoke  openly  of  him,  from  fear  of  the  Jews. 

14  And  in  tne  midst*>  of  the  days  of  the  feast,  Jesus 

15  went  into  the  -temple,  and  taught.  (16)  And  the 
Jews  wondered,  and  said :  How  knoweth  this  man 

16  literature,  having  not  been  educated?  (16)  Jesus 
answered  and  said :  My  doctrine  is  not  from  me, 

17  but  from  him  that  sent  me.  (17)  He  that  wisheth 
to  do  his  pleasure,  will  understand  my  doctrine, 
whether  it  is  from  God,  or  whether  I  speak  from 

18  my  own  pleasure.  (18)  He  that  speaketh  accord- 
ing to  the  pleasure  of  his  own  mind,  seeketh  glory 
for  himself;  but  he  who  seeketh  the  glory  of  him 
that  sent  him,  is  veracious,  and  evil  is  not  in  his 

19  heart.    (19)  Did  not  Moses  give  you  the  law? 

20  Yet  no  one  of  you  observeth  the  law.  (20)  Why 
do  ye  seek  to  kill  me?  The  multitude  answered 
and  said:   Thou  hast  a  demon:   who  seeketh  to 

21  kill  thee?  (21)  Jesus  replied,  and  said  to  them: 
I  have  wrougnt  one  work,  and  ye  all  wonder. 

22  (22)  Because  Moses  gave  you  circumcision,  (not 
that  it  was  from  Moses,  but  it  was  from  the  fathers,) 

28  ye  circumcise  a  child  on  the  sabbath.  (23)  And  if 
a  child  is  circumcised  on  the  sabbath  day,  that  the 


*•  Sy.  when  the 
days  of  the 
feast  were 
divided. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


180 


JOHN,  VII. 


Sy. 


i  •  a  •  n 


By.USZl 


or,l9 


law  of  Moses  may  not  be  violated,  do  je  murmur 
at  me,  because  I  have  made  a  man  entirely  sound 
on  the  sabbath  day?    (24)  Judge  not,  with  a  re-  24 
speot  for  persons ;  but  judge  ye  a  righteous  judg- 
ment—(25)  And  some  from  Jerusalem  said:   Is  25 
not  this  he,  whom  they  seek  to  kill?    (26)  And  26 
lo,  he  discourseth  publicly,  and  they  say  nothing 
to  him.    Do  our  Elders^  know,  that  he  really  is 
the  Messiah?    (27)  Yet  we  know  this  man,  whence  27 
he  is;  the  Messiah,  when  he  shall  come,  no  one 
knoweth  whence  he  is.    (28)  And  Jesus,  while  28 
teaching  in  the  temple,  raised  his  voice  and  said: 
Ye  both  know  me,  and  ye  know  from  whence  I 
am.    And  I  did  not  come  of  my  own  accord ;  but 
he  that  sent  me  is  true.    Hun  ye  know  not; 
(29)  but  I  know  him ;  because  I  am  from  him,  and  29 
he  sent  me. — (80)  And  they  sought  to  apprehend  80 
him ;  but  np  one  laid  hands  on  him,  because  his 
hour  was  not  yet  come.    (81)  And  many  of  the  81 
multitude  believed  on  him,  and  said:   When  the 
Messiah  cometh,  will  he  work  greater  signs^  than 
these  which  this  man  doeth  ?    (32)  And  me  Phari-  82 
sees  heard  the  multitude  say  these  things  of  him : 
and  they  and  the  chief  priests  sent  constables  to 
take  him.    (33)  And  Jesus  said:  A  little  while  88 
longer  I  am  with  you,  and  then  I  go  to  him  that 
sent  me.    (34)  And  ye  will  seek  me,  and  will  not  84 
find  me;    and  where  I  am,    ye    cannot    come. 
^85)  The  Jews  said  among  themselves:  Whither  35 
is  he  about  to  go,  that  we  cannot  find  him?     Will 
he  go  to  some  region  of  the  Gentiles,  and  teach  the 
profane?    (36)  What  means®  this  speech  he   ut-  36 
tered:   Ye  will  seek  me,  and  will  not  find  me; 
and  where  I  am,  ye  cannot  come? 

And  on  the  great  day,  which  was  the  last  of  the  87 
feast,  Jesus  stood  and  cried,  and  said :  If  any  man 
thirst,  let  him  come  to  me  and  drink.    (38)  Who-  88 
ever  believeth  in  me,  as  the  scriptures  have  said, 
Out  of  his  belly  shall  flow  rivers  of  living  waters. 
(39)  (This  he  said  of  the  Spirit,  which  they  who  89 
believe  in  him  were  to  receive:   for  the  Spirit 
had  not  yet  been  given,  because  Jesus  was  not. 
yet  glorified.)    (40)  And  many  of  the  multitude  40 
who  heard  his  discourses,  said:  Certainly,  he  is 
a  prophet.    (41)  Others  said :  He  is  the  Messiah.  41 
Others  said:    Doth  Messiah  come  from  Galilee? 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,    VIIL 


181 


42  (42)  Doth  not  the  scriptures  say,  That  Messiah 

Cometh  of  the  seed  of  David,  and  fix)m  Bethlehem 

48  the  town  of  David  ?    (48)  And  there  was  a  division 

44  among  the  multitude  respecting  him.  (44)  And 
there  were  some  of  them  who  wished  to  apprehend 

45  him.  But  no  one  laid  hands  on  him. — (46)  And  the 
constables  came  to  the  chief  priests  and  Pharisees; 
and  the  priests  said  to  them :  Why  have  ye  not 

46  brought  him?  (46)  The  constables  say  to  them: 
Never  did  a  man  speak,  as  this  man  speaketL 

47  (47)  The  Pharisees  said  to  them:  Are  ve  also  de- 

48  ceived?    (48)  Have  any  of  the  chiefe,' or  of  the 

49  Pharisees,  believed  in  him?    (49)  But  this  peo- 

50  pie,  who  know  not  the  law,  are  accursed.  (50)  One 
of  them :  Nicodemua  he  who  came  to  tiesus  by 

61  night,  said  to  them:  (51)  Doth  our  law  condemn  a 
man,  imless  it  first  hear  him,  and  know  what  he 

62  hath  done?    (52)  They  answered,  and  said  to  him 
Art  thou  also  firom  Gkuilee?    SearckaiuLaee,  thai. 

53  no  prophet  ariseth  fix)m  Galilee.rn^)  So  they 
went  every  one  to  his  own  house.*  \ 

VUL    And  Jesus  went   to  the  mount  of  Olives. 

2  (2)  And  in  the  morning  he  came  again  to  the  tem- 
ple; and  all  the  people  came  to  him,  and  he  sat 

8  down  and  taught  them.  (3^  And  the  Scribes  and 
Pharisees  brought  forwaxa  a  woman  that  was 
caught  in  adultery.    And  when  they  had  placed 

4  her  in  the  midst,  (4)  they  say  to  him:  Teacher, 
this  woman  was  cau^nt^openly  in  the  act  of  ad^- 

6  tery.  {5)  And  ia  the  law  of  Moses,  [God]  hath 
commanded  us  to  stone  such  persons.    What  there- 

6  fore  dost  thou  say?  (6)  And  this  they  said,  tempt- 
ing him,  so  that  they  might  have  [ground]  to  accuse 
him.    But  Jesus  having  stooped  down,  was  writing 

7  on  the  ground.  (7)  And  as  they  continued  asking 
him,  he  straightened  himself  up,  and  said  to  them: 
Whoever  among  you  is  without  sin,  let  him  first 

8  cast  a  stone  at  her.    (8)  And,  having  again  stooped 

9  down,  he  wrote  on  tne  ground.    (9)  And  they, 
when  they  heard  [it],  went  out  one  by  one,  begin-  •  Sy. 
ning  with  the  older;*  and  the  woman  was  left 

10  alone,  where  she  had  stood  in  the  midst    (10)  And 


sy.u^; 


*  This  63d  verse  is  wanting  in  many  early  editions  of  the  Syriao  N.  Testament 
So  also  the  whole  story  of  the  adulteress,  in  the  following  ehapter,  v.  1-11. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


182 


JOHN,   VIIL 


^  Sy.  corporeal' 


judge 
5)  Yet 


18 
14 


15 
16 


17 
18 


when  Jesus  had  straightened  himself  up,  he  said 
to  the  woman:  Where  are  they?    Doth  no  one 
condemn  thee?    (11)  And  she  said:   No  man,  31 
Lord.    And  Jesus  said:   Neither  do  I  condemn 
thee.    Go  thou,  and  henceforth  sin  no  more. 

And  Jesus  again  conversed  with  them,  and  said:  12 
I  am  the  light  of  the  world:  he  that  cometh  to 
me,  will  not  walk  in  darkness;  but  will  find  for 
himself  the  light  of  life.    (18)  The  Pharise.es  said 
to  him :  Thou  bearest  witness  of  thyself,  thy  testi- 
mony is  not  certain.    (14)  Jesus  answered  and  said 
to  them :  Although  I  bear  witness  of  myself  my 
testimony  is  certain,  because  I  know  whence  I 
came,  and  whither  I  go.    But  ye  do  not  know, 
whence  I  came,  and  whither  I  go.    (15)  Ye  " 
according  to  the  flesh  :*»  I  judge  no  one.    (16) 
if  I  judge,  my  judgment  is  certain,  because  I  am 
not  alone,   but  I  and  my  Father  who  sent  me. 
(17)  And  in  your  law  it  is  written,  that  the  testi- 
mony of  two  persons  is  certain.    (18)  I  am  one 
who  bear  witness  of  myself  and  my  Father  who 
sent  me,  beareth  witness  of  me.    (19)  They  say  to  19 
him:  Where  is  thy  Father?    Jesus  replied,  and 
said  to  them :  Ye  neither  know  me  nor  my  Father. 
If  ye  had  known  me,  ye  would  also  have  known 
my  Father. — (20)  These  words  spake  Jesus  in  the  20 
treasury,  as  he  taught  in  the  temple :  and  no  one 
laid  hands  on  him,  because  his  hour  was  not  yet 
come. 

Again  Jesus  said  to  them :  I  go  away,  and  ye  21 
will  seek  me,  and  will  die  in  your  sins.     And 
whither  I  go,  ye  cannot  come.    (2z)  The  Jews  said:  22 
Is  he  about  to  kill  himseL^  that  he  should  say. 
Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come?    (28)  And  he  saia  23 
to  them:  Ye  are  from  below,  I  am  from  above; 
ye  are  of  this  world,   I  am  not  of  this  world. 
(24)  I  said  to  you,  That  ye  will  die  in  your  sins;  24 
for  if  ye  believe  not  that  I  am  he,  ye  will  die  in 
your  sins.    (26)  The  Jews  said  to  him :  Who  art  25 
thou?  Jesus  said  to  them :  Although  I  have  begun 
to  converse  with  you,  (26)  I  have  yet  many  things  26 
to  say  and  to  judge  concerning  you.     But  he  that 
sent  me  is  true :  and  the  thin^  which  I  have  heard 
from  him,  them  I  speak  in  tne  world.    (27)  And  27 
they  did  not  know,  that  he  spake  to  them  of  the 
Father.    (28)  Jesus  said  to  them  again :  When  ye  28 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   VIIL 


183 


! 


87 
88 


shall  have  lifted  up  the  Son  of  man,  then  will  ye 

know  that  I  am  he,  and  that  I  do  nothing  from  m; 

own  pleasure,  but  as  my  Father  taught  me,  so  ' 
29  speak.    ^9J  And  he  that  sent  me,  is  with  me; 

and  my  Fatner  hath  not  left  me  alone,  because  I 
80  do,  at  all  times,  that  which  pleaseth  him. — (30)  And 

when  he  had  spoken  these  things,  many' believed 
31  on  him.     (31)  And  Jesus  said  to  those  Jews  who 

believed  on  him :  If  ye  continue  in  my  word,  ye 
82  will  be  truly  my  disciples.      (82)    And  ye  will 

know  the  truth;    and  the  truth  will  make  you 

88  free.  (83)  They  say  to  him :  We  are  the  seed  of 
Abraham,  and  never  were  in  servitude  to  any 
man ;  and  how  sayest  thou,  Ye  will  be  freemen  ? 

84  (84)  Jesus  said  to  them:  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
you,  That  whoever  committeth  sin,  is  the  servant 

85  of  sin.     (85)  And  a  servant  abideth  not  for  ever« 

86  in  the  house ;  but  the  Son  abideth  for  ever.  (86)  If 
therefore  the  Son  shall  _make  you  freCj  ye  will 
realRJe  free  men.^  _(87)  I  know  that  ye  are  the 
cEildren  ojf  AbraEam ;  but  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  be- 
cause ye  do  not  acquiesce  m  my  word.  (88)  I 
speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with  my  Father,  and 
ye  do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  father. 

89  ^89)  They  answered,  and  said  to  him :  Our  father 
is  Abraham.  Jesus  said  to  them:  If  ye  were 
children  of  Abraham,  ye  would  do  the  works  of 

40  Abraham.  (40)  But  now  ye  seek  to  kill  me,  a 
man  who  hath  told  you  the  truth,  which  I  have 

41  heard  from  God :  this  did  not  Abraham.  (41)  But 
ye  do  the  works  of  your  father.  They  say  to  him : 
We  are  not  [the  oflfepring]  of  whoredom ;  we  have 

42  one  Father,  God.  (42)  Jesus  said  to  them :  If  God 
were  your  Father,  ye  would  love  me ;  for  I  pro- 
ceeded and  came  from  God :  I  did  not  come  of  my 

48  own  accord,  but  he  sent  me.  (43)  Why  do  ye  not 
understand  my  speech  ?    It  is  because  ye  cannot 

44  hear  my  speech.  (44)  Ye  are  of  your  father,  the 
calumniator  ;d  and  the  lust  of  your  father  ye  are 
disposed  to  do.  He  was  from  the  beginning  a 
manslayer,  and  abode  not  in  the  truth ;  for  the  truth 
is  not  m  him,  and  when  he  speaketh  a  lie  he  speak- 
eth  from  himself,  for  he  is  a  liar,  and  the  father 

45  of  it    (45)  But  me,  because  I  speak  the  truth,  ye 

46  believe  me  not.  (46)  Which  of  you  convicteth  me 
of  sin?    And  if  I  speak  the  truth,  why  do  ye  not 


Sy.!^2ll^i 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


184 


JOHN,   IX. 


Sy.oA^) 


Sy. 


believe  me?    (47)  He  that  is  of  God,  heareth  the  47 
words  of  God.    Therefore  ye  do  not  hear,  because 
ye  are  not  of  God.    (48)  The  Jews  answered,  and  48 
said  to  him :  Did  we  not  well  say,  that  thou  art  a 
Samaritan,  and  hast  a  demon?    (49)  Jesus  said  to  49 
them :  I  have  no  demon :  but  I  honor  God ;  and 
ye  contemn  me.     (50)  But  I  seek  not  my  own  50 
fflory :  there  is  one  that  seeketh  [it],  and  judgeth. 
^1)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you :  He  that  keepeth  51 
my  word,  will  never  see  death.     (52)  The  J  ews  52 
say  to  him :  Now  we  know,  that  thou  hast  a  demon. 
Abraham  is  dead,  and  the  prophets;   yet  thou 
sayest :  He  that  keepeth  my  word,  will  never  taste 
death.     (53)   Art  thou  greater  than  our  fether  58 
Abraham  who  is  dead,  or  than  the  prophets  who 
died?     What  dost  thou  make  thyself?    (54)  Jesus  54 
said  to  them :  If  I  glorify  myself,  my  glory  is  noth- 
ing.   It  is  my  Father  that  glorifieth  me,  of  whom 
ye  say.  He  is  our  God.    {65)  And  ye  know  him  55 
not.  feut  I  know  him ;  and  if  I  should  say,  I  know 
him  not,  I  should  be  a  liar,  like  you:  but  I  do 
know  him,  and  I  observe  his  word.  (56J  Abraham  66 
your  father  desired  to  see  my  day :  ana  he  saw  it, 
and  rejoiced.    (67)  The  Jews  say  to  him:  Thou  57 
art  not  yet  fifty  years  old,  and  hast  thou  seen 
Abraham  ?  (58)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Verily,  verily,  58 
I  say  to  you,  That  before  Abraham  existed,®  I  was, 
(59)  And  they  took  up  stones  to  stone  him.    But  59 
Jesus    conceded   himself   and  went  out  of  the 
temple,  and  passed  along  among  them,  and  went 
away. 

And  while  passing,  he  saw  a  man  blind  firom  his  IX. 
mother's  womb.    (2)  And  his  disciples  asked  him,    2 
and  said :  Our  Babbi,  who  sinned,  this  man  or  his 
parents,  that  he  was  bom  blind  ?    (S)  Jesus  said  to    8 
them:  Neither  did  he  sin,  nor  his  parents;   but 
that  the  works  of  God  might  be  seen  m  him.   (4)  I    4 
must  work  the  works  of  him  that  sent  me,  while  it 
is  day;  the  night  cometh,  in  which  no  one  can 
work.    (S)  So  long  as  I  am  in  the  world,  I  am  the    5 
light  of  tne  world.    (6)  And  having  spoken  thus,     6 
he  spit  on  the  ground,  and  made  mud  with  the 
spittle,  and  spread  it  on  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man  * 
(7)  and  said  to  him :  Go,  wash  in  the  baptistery*  of     7 
Siloam.     And  he  went,  and  washed,  and  came 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   IX. 


185 


8  away  seeinff.    (8)  And  his  neighbors,  and  they  hj 
whom  he  bad  before  been  seen  begging,  said :  Is 

9  not  this  he,  who  sat  and  begged?  ^9)  Some  said.  It 
is  he :  and  others  said.  No ;  but  he  is  very  like  him. 

10  But  he  said :  I  am  he.    (10)  And  they  said  to  him: 

11  How  were  thy  eyes  opened?  (11)  He  answered, 
and  said  to  tnem :  A  man  whose  name  is  Jesus, 
made  mud  and  spread  it  on  my  eyes,  and  said  to 
me,  Go,  wash  in  the  waters  of  Siloam.  And  I 
went,  and  washed,  and  my  sight  was  restored, 

12  (12)  They  said  to  him :  Where  is  he?  He  said  to 
them :  I  know  not 

18      And  they  brought  him  that  had  been  blind, 
14  before  th^  Pharisees.    (14)  Now  it  was  on  the  sab- 
bath that  Jesus  made  the  mud,  and  opened  his 
16  eyea.    (15)  And  again  the  Pharisees  asked  him: 
How  was  thy  sight  restored?    And  he  said  to 
them :  He  put  mud  upon  my  eyes,  and  I  washed, 

16  and  my  sight  was  restored.  (16)  And  some  of  the 
Pharisees  said :  This  man  is  not  of  God,  for  he  doth 
not  observe  the  sabbath.  But  others  said:  How 
can  a  man  that  is  a  sinner,  work  these  signs  ?   And 

17  there  was  a  division  among  them.  (17)  Thw  say 
again  to  the  blind  man :  What  sayest  thou  of  him, 
seeing  he  hath  opened  thy  eyes  ?    He  said  to  them : 

18  I  say,  that  he  is  a  prophet.  (18)  And  the  Jews 
would  not  believe  concerning  him,  that  he  had 
been  blind,  and  recovered  sight,  until  they  called 

19  the  parents  of  him  who  recovered  sight.  (19)  And 
they  asked  them*:  Is  this  your  son,  of  whom  ye  say 
that  he  was  bom  blind  ?    And  how  doth  he  now 

20  see?  (20)  And  his  parents  answered  and  said: 
We  know  that  this  is  our  son,  and  that  he  was  bom 

21  blind ;  (21)  but  how  he  now  seeth,  or  who  opened 
his  eyes,  we  know  not.   He  hath  come  to  his  years, 

22  ask  him;  he  will  speak  for  himself  (22)  These 
things  said  his  parents,  because  they  feared  the 
Jews:  for  the  Jews  had  decided,  that  if  any  one 
should  confess  him  to  be  Messiah,  they  would 

23  expel  him  from  the  synagogue.  (23)  For  this 
reason  his  parents  said.  He  hath  come  to  his  years, 

24  ask  him. — (24^  And  they  called  a  second  time  the 
man  who  haa  been  blind,  and  said  to  him :  Give 
^lory  to  God ;  for  we  know  that  this  man  is  a 

25  sinner.  (25)  He  replied,  and  said  to  them :  Whether 
lie  is  a  sinner,  I  know  not ;  but,  one  thing  T  know, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


186 


^  Sy.  not  from 

€fM. 


JOHN,   X. 

that  I  was  blind,  and  lo,  now  I  see.    (26)  They  26 
said  to  him  again :  What  did  he  to  thee  ?   How  did 
he  open  thy  eyes  ?     (27)  He  said  to  them :  I  have  27 
told  you,  and  ye  did  not  hear.     Why  would  ye 
hear  again  ?    Do  ye  also  wish  to  become  his  disci- 

Eles?     (28)  But  tney  reproached  him,  and  said  to  28 
im :  Thou  art  his  disciple,  but  we  are  the  disci- 
ples of  Moses.     (29)  And  we  know  that  God  con-  29 
versed  with  Moses ;  but  as  for  this  man,  we  know 
not  whence  he  is.     (80)  The  man  replied  and  said  80 
to  them :   In  this  therefore  is  [something]  to  be 
admired,  that  ye  know  not  whence  he  is,  and  yet 
he  hath  opened  my  eyes.   (81)  Now  we  know,  that  81 
God  heareth  not  the  voice  of  sinners ;  but  him  that 
feareth  him,  and  doeth  his  pleasure,  him  he  hear- 
eth.    (82)  Never^  hath  it  been  heard,  that  any  one  82 
opened  tne  eyes  of  one  bom  blind.     (38)  If  this  83 
man  were  not  of  God,  he  could  not  do  tms  thing. 
(84)  They  replied,  and  said  to  him:  Thou  wast  84 
wholly  bom  in  sins ;  and  dost  thou  teach  us  ?   And 
they  expelled  him. 

And  Jesus  heard  that  they  had  expelled  him ;  35 
and  he  found  him,  and  said  to  him :  Belie  vest  thou 
on  the  Son  of  God  ?    (86)  And  he  that  was  healed,  86 
answered  and  said:    My  Lord,  who  is  he,  that  I 
may  believe  on  him?     (87)  Jesus  said  to  him:  87 
Thou  hast  seen  him,  and  it  is  he  that  talketh  with 
thee.     (38)  And  he  said:  My  Lord,  I  believe:  and  38 
he  fell   down,  and   worshipped  him. — (89)  And  89 
Jesus  said :  For  the  judgment  of  this  world,  have 
I  come;  that  they  who  see  not,  might  see;  and 
that  they  who  see,  might  become  blind.    (40)  And  40 
[some]  of  those  Pharisees  who  were  with  him,  heard 
these  things;  and  they  said  to  him:  How?    Are 
we  also  blind  ?     (41)  Jesus  said  to  them :   If  ye  41 
were  blind,  ye  would,  be  without  sin ;  but  now  ye 
say,  We  see ;  therefore  your  sin  is  established. 

Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  he  who  doth  not  X, 
enter  by  the  door  into  the  fold  of  the  flock,  but 
climbeth  up  in  some  other  place,  he  is  a  thief  and  a 
robber.    (2)  But  he  that  entereth  by  the  door,  is  the    2 
shepherd  of  the  flock.     (3)  And  to  him  the  door-    8 
keeper  openeth  the  door;  and  the  sheep  hear  his 
voice.   And  he  calleth  the  sheep  by  their  names,  and 
leadeth  them  out.   (4)  And  when  he  hath  led  out  his    4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   X. 


187 


flock,  he  goeth  before  it ;  and  his  sheep  follow  him, 

5  because  they  know  his  voice.     (6)  But  after  a 

stranger  the  flock  will  not  follow,  but  it  fleeth  from 

him ;  because  it  knoweth  not  the  voice  of  a  stran- 

•  6  ger.     (6)  This  allegory*  spake  Jesus  to  them ;  but  •  Sy.  IZ)]^ 

7  they  knew  not  what  he  said  to  them. — (7)  And 
Jesus  said  to  them  again:  Verily,  verily,  Isav  to 

8  you.  That  I  am  the  door  of  the  flock.    (8)  All  those 
who  have  come,  were  thieves  and  robbers:    but 

9  the  flock  did  not  hear  them.     (9)  I  am  the  door : 
and  if  any  enter  by  me,  he  will  live,  and  will  come 

10  in  and  go  out,  and  will  find  pasture.  (10)  The 
thief  Cometh  not,  but  that  he  may  steal,  and  kill, 
and  destroy.     I  have  come,  that  they  may  have 

11  life,  and  may  have  that  which  is  excellent.  (11)  I 
am  a  good  shepherd.     A  good  shepherd  exposeth 

12  his  life  for  the  sheep.  (12)  But  a  hireling,  who  is 
not  the  shepherd,  and  to  whom  the  sheep  do  not 
belong,  when  he  seeth  the  wolf  coming,  leaveth  the 
flock,  and  fleeth ;  and  the  wolf  cometh,  and  teareth, 

13  and  disperseth  the  flock.  (13)  And  a  hireling 
fleeth,  because  he  is  a  hireling,  and  hath  no  concern 

14  for  the  flock.  (14)  I  am  a  good  shepherd ;  and  I 
know  my  own  [sheep],  and  am  known  by  my  own. 

15  (15)  As  my  Father  knoweth  me,  so  know  I  my 

16  Father ;  and  I  expose  my  life  for  the  flock.  (16)  And 
I  have  other  sheep,  which  are  not  of  this  fold :  and 
them  also  I  must  bring;  and  they  will  hear  my 
voice ;  and  the  whole  will  be  one  flock,  and  one 

17  shepherd.  (17)  For  this  cause  my  Father  loveth 
me,  that  I  lay  down  my  life,  to  resume  it  again. 

18  (18)  There  is  no  one  that  taketh  it  from  me ;  but  I 
lay  it  down  of  my  own  pleasure:  for  I  have 
authority  to  lay  it  down,  and  authority  to  resume 
it  again;  because  I  have  received  this  command 

19  from  m'y  Father. — (19)  And  again  there  was  a 
division  among  the  Jews,  on  account  of  these  say- 

20  ings.    (20)  And  many  of  them  said :   He  hath 
demon,  and  is  wholly  beside  himself;  why  hear  ye 

21  him?  (21)  But  others  said:  These  are  not  the 
discourses  of  a  demoniac :  can  a  demon  open  the 
eyes  of  one  blind  ? 

22  And  the  feast  of  the  dedication**  was  [held]  at  ^  Sy  ]2.>Q>i 

23  Jerusalem,  and  it  was  winter.  (23)  And  Jesus 
walked  in  the  temple,  in  the  porch  of  Solomon, 

24  (24)  And  the  Jews  gathered  around  him;  and  said 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


188 


JOHN,    XL 


''Qy.](JllL 


ay.^ynsN 


^  Sy.  JvlI 


to  him :  how  long  holdest  thou  our  mind  in  sus- 
pense?   If  thou  art  the  Messiah,  tell  us  plainly. 
(26)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them :  I  have  told  26 
you,  and  ye  did  not  believe.     The  works  which  I 
do  in  the  name  of  my  Father,  they  testify  of  me. 
(26)  But  ye  do  not.  believe,  because  ye  are  not  of  26 
my  sheep,  as  I  have  said  to  you.    (27)  My  sheep  27 
hear  my  voice:  and  I  know  them:  and  they  go  af- 
ter me.    (28)  And  I  give  to  them  life  eternal:  and  28 
they  will  never  be  lost:^  nor  will  any  one  pluck 
them  from  my  hand.   (29^  For  my  Father,  who  gave  29 
[them]  to  me,  is  greater  tnan  all ;  nor  can  any  pluck 
&om  my  Father's  hand.     (80)  I  and  my  Father  are,  80 
one.    (31)  And  again  the  Jews  took  up  stones,  to  81 
stone  hun.    (82)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Many  good  82 
works  have  I  snowed  you  from  my  Father;  for 
which  of  those  works  do  ye  stone  me?    (88)  The  38 
Jews  said  to  him:  It  is  not  on  account  of  good 
works,  that  we  stone  thee:  but  because  thou  blas- 
phemest ;  and,  whilst  thou  art  a  man,  thou  makest 
thyself  God.    (34)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Is  it  not  84 
written  in  your  law,  I  have  said.  Ye  are  gods?^ 
f36)  If  he  called  them  gods,  because  the  word  of  85 
God  was  with  them,  and  the  scripture  cannot  be 
nullified ;  (86)  do  ye  say  to  him,  whom  the  Father  36 
hath  sanctified  and  sent  into  the  world.  Thou  blas- 
phemest ;  because  I  said  to  you,  I  am  the  Son  of 
God?    (37)  And  if  I  do  not  the  works  of  my  Father,  37 
believe  me  not.    (88)  But  if  I  do  [them],  although  88 
ye  believe  not  me,  yet  believe  the  workis ;  that  ye 
may  know  and  believe,  that  my  Father  is  in  me, 
and  I  in  my  Father. — (39)  And  again  they  sought  89 
to  lay  hold  of  him ;  but  he  escaped  out  of  their 
hands ;  (40)  and  retired  to  the  other  side®  of  the  40 
Jordan,  to  the  place  where  John  at  first  baptized, 
and  tarried  there.    (41)  And  many  persons  came  41 
to  him :  and  they  said,  John  indeed  wrought  not 
even  one  sign ;  but  every  thing  that  John  said  of 
this  man,  was  true.    (42)  And  many  believed  on  42 
him. 

And  a  certain  man  was  sick,  Lazarus*  of  the  XL 
town  of  Bethany,  the  brother  of  Mary  and  Martha. 
(2)  It  was  that  Mary  who  anointed  the  feet  of  Jesus    2 
with  perfume,  and  wiped  [them]  with  her  hair, 
whose  brother  Lazarus  was  sick.     (3)  And  his  two    8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XT 

sisters  sent   to  Jesus,   and  said:    Our  Lord,  he 

4  whom  thou  lovest  is  sick.  (4)  And  Jesus  said: 
This  sickness  is  not  that  of  death,  but  for  the 
glory  of  God,  that  the  Son  of  God  may  be  glori< 

5  fied  by  means  of  it    (5)  Now  Jesus  loved  Martha 

6  and  Mary,  and  Lazarus.  (6)  And  when  he  heard 
that  he  was  sick,  he  remained  in  the  place  where 

7  he  was  two  days.  (7)  And  afterwards  he  said  to 
his  disciples :  Come,  let  us  go  again  into  Judfida. 

8  (8)  His  disciples  say  to  him:  Our  Eabbi,  the  Jews 
have  just  sought  to  stone  thee;   and  goest  thou 

9  again  thither.  (9)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Are  there 
not  twelve  hours  m  the  day  ?  And  if  a  man  walk 
in  the  daytime,   he  stumbleth  not;   because  he 

10  seeth  the  light  of  the  world.  (10)  But  if  one 
walk  in  the  night,  he  stumbleth ;  because  there  is 

11  no  light  in  him.  (11)  These  things  said  Jesus,  and 
afterwards  he  said  to  them:  Lazarus  our  friend 

12  reposeth.^  But  I  go  to  awake  him.  (12)  His  dis- 
ciples say  to  him:  Our  Lord,  if  he  sleepeth,  he  is 

13  recovering.  (13)  But  Jesus  spoke  of  his  death; 
and  they  thought,  he  spoke  of  the  sleep  of  repose. 

14  (14)  Then  Jesus  said  to  them  explicitly :  Lazarus 

15  is  dead.  (15)  And  I  rejoice,  for  your  sakes,  that  I 
was  not  there ;  that  ye  may  believe.    But  let  us  ^ 

16  there.  (16)  Thomas,  who  is  called  the  Twin,  said 
to  his  fellow-disciples:  Let  us  also  go  [and]  die 
with  him. 

17  And  Jesus  came  to  Bethany,  and  found  that  he 

18  had  been  in  the  grave^four  dajj^a.  (18)  Now  Beth- 
any was  near  to  Jerusalem,  oistant  from  it  about 

19  fifteen  furlongs.  (19)  And  many  of  the  Jews  had 
come  to  Martha  and  Mary,  to  comfort  ^  them  con- 

20  cerning  their  brother.  (20)  And  Martha,  when 
she  heard  that  Jesus  was  coming,  went  out  to  meet 

21  him ;  but  Mary  was  sitting  in  the  house.  (21)  And 
Martha  ^id  to  Jesus :  My  Lord,  if  thou  hadst  been 

22  here,  my  brother  had  not  died.  (22)  But  even 
now,  I  know,  that  whatever  thou  wilt  ask  of  God, 

23  he  will  give  it  thee.     (23)  Jesus  said  to  her :  Thy 

24  brother  will  rise;  (^24)  Martha  said  to  him:  i 
know,  that  he  will  rise  in  the  consolation,^  at  the 

25  last  day.  (25)  Jesus  said  to  her :  I  am  the  conso- 
lation, and  life.     And  he  that  believeth  in  me, 

26  though  he  should  die,  will  live.  (26)  And  eveiy 
one  mat  Hveth,  and  believeth  in  me,  yrill  not  die. 


189 


Sv. 


Sy.  to  speak  U 
their  hearts. 


<*  or,  resurrec" 
tion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


190 


JOHN,   XL 


27 


28 


29 
30 


82 


33 
34 


for  ever.  Belie  vest  thou  this?  (27)  She  said  to 
him :  Yes,  my  Lord ;  I  believe  that  thou  art  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  that  cometh  into  the 
world.— (28)  And  when  she  had  thus  said,  she 
went  and  called  her  sister  Mary,  secretly,  and  said 
to  her :  Our  Eabbi  hath  come,  and  calleth  for  thee. 
(29)  And  Mary,  when  she  heard  [it],  rose  up 
quickly,  and  went  to  meet  him.  (30)  And  Jesus 
had  not  yet  entered  the  village,  but  was  in  the 
place  where  Martha  met  him.  (31)  Those  Jews  31 
also,  who  were  with  her  in  the  house  and  consoled 
her,  when  they  saw  that  Mary  rose  up  quickly  and 
went  out,  followed  after  her;  for  they  supposed, 
she  was  going  to  the  grave  to  weep.  (32)  And 
Mary,  when  she  came  where  Jesus  was  and  saw 
him,  fell  at  his  feet,  and  said  to  him:  Kthou  hadst 
been  here,  my  Lord,  my  brother  had  not  died. 
(33)  And  when  Jesus  saw  her  weeping,  and  the 
Jews  weeping  who  came  with  her,  he  was  moved 
in  spirit,  and  was  agitated.  (34)  And  he  said: 
Where  have  ye  laid  him  ?  Thw  say  to  him :  Our 
Lord,  come,  and  see.  (35)  And  the  tears  of  Jesus  35 
came.  (36)  And  the  Jews  said:  See,  how  much  he  36 
loved  him.  (37)  And  some  of  them  said :  Could  37 
not  he  who  opened  the  eyes  of  the  blind  man,  have 
caused  that  this  also  should  not  have  died  ? — (38)  38 
And  Jesus,  still  agitated  within,  came  to  the  grave. 
Now  the  grave  was  a  cave,  and  a  stone  was  laid 
upon  its  entrance.  (39)  And  Jesus  said:  Take  39 
away  this  stone.  Martha,  the  sister  of  the  de- 
ceased, said  to  him :  My  Lord,  by  this  time  he  is 
putrid;  for^four  days  have  elapsed.  (40)  Jesus 
said  to  her:  Did  I  not  tell  thee,  that  if  thou 
wouldst  believe,  thou  shouldst  see  the  glory  of 
God  ?  (41)  And  they  took  away  the  stone.  And 
Jesus  raised  his  eyes  on  high,  and  said:  Father,  I 
thank  thee  that  thou  hast  heard  me.  (42)»  And  I 
know  that  thou  hearest  me  always ;  but  on  account 
of  this  multitude  that  standeth  here,  I  say  these 
things;  that  they  may  believe,  that  thou  hast  sent 
me.  (43)  And  when  he  had  thus  spoken,  he  called  48 
with  a  loud  voice:  Lazarus,  come  forth  I  (44)  And  44 
the  dead  man  came  forth,  with  his  hands  and  his 
feet  swathed  with  bandages,  and  his  face  with  a 
napkin.  Jesus  said  to  them :  Loose  him,  and  let 
him  go. 


40 


41 

42 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XIL 


191 


45 


46 
47 


48 


49 
50 


61 


52 


53 
54 


And  manj  of  the  Jews  who  had  come  to  Mary, 
when  they  saw  what  Jesus  did,  believed  on  him. 
(46J  But  some  of  them  went  to  the  Eharisees^  and 
tola  them  all  that  Jesus  had  done.;^47)  And  the 
cluef  priests  and  Pharisees  assembled  together,  and 
said:  What  shall  we  do?  For  this  man  worketh 
many  signs.  (48)  And  if  we  thus  let  him  alone, 
all  the  people  will  believe  in  him;  and  the  Ro- 
mans* will  come,  and  will  take  away  our  place 
and  our  nation.  (49)  But,  one  of  them,  named 
Caiaphas,  was  the  high  priest  of  that  year ;  and  he 
said  to  them :  Ye  know  not  any  thing.  (50)  Nei- 
ther do  ye  consider,  that  it  is  expedient  for  us, 
that  one  man  die  for  the  people,  and  not  that  this 
whole  people  perish.  (51)  This  he  said,  however, 
not  from  the  promptings  of  his  own  mind ;  but  be- 
ing the  high  priest  of  that  year,  he  prophesied,  that 
Jesus  was  about  to  die  for  the  people:  (52)  and 
not  only  for  the  people,^  but  also  tnat  he  might 
collect  together  tne  sons  of  God  that  were  dis- 
persed. (53)  And  from  that  day,  they  plotted  to 
kill  him. — (54)  And  Jesus  did  not  walk  openly 
among  the  Jews ;  but  retired  from  them  to  a  place 
near  the  wilderness,  to  a  town  called  Ephraim ;  i 

55  and  there  he  abode  with  his  disciples.4-(55)*  Arid 
the  passover  of  the  Jews  drew  near:  and  many 
went  up  from  the  villages  to  Jerusalem,  before  the 

56  feast,  that  they  might  purify  themselves,  (56)  And 
they  sought  for  Jesus ;  and  they  said  one  to  another, 
in  the  temple :  What  think  ye  ?  that  he  will  not 
come  to  the  feast  ?  (57)  And  the  chief  priests  and 
the  Pharisees  had  commanded  that  if  any  one  knew 
where  he  was,  he  should  make  it  known  to  them, 
that  they  might  take  him. 

XIL  And  six  days  before  the  passover,  Jesus  came 
to  Bethany,  where  was  that  Lazarus  whom  Jesus 

2  raised  from  the  dead.  (2)  And  they  made  a  sup- 
per for  him  there:  and  Martha  served,  and  Laz- 

8  arus  was  one  of  the  guests^  with  him.  (3)  And 
Mary  took  an  alabaster  box  of  perfume  of  choice 

Spikenard,  of  great  price ;  and  anointed  the  feet  of 
esus;  and  she  wiped  his  feet  with  her  hair.     And 
the  house  was  filled  with  the  odor  of  the  perfume. 
4  (4)  Then  said  Judas  Iscariot,  one  of  the  disciples,  he 
6  that  was  about  to  betray  him:  (5)  Why  was  not 


Digitized  by 


67 


•Sy.VftiDOOl) 


'  he,  the  Jew§ 

in  Jud(ea» 


'  Sy.  :>a^|jd) 


a  Sy.  rec  liners 


Google 


192 


JOHN,   XII. 


'  »tftUuUoiL 


''  By.  U^^ol 


7 
8 


this  ointment  sold  for  three  hundred  denarii,  and 
given  to  the  poor  ?    (6)  And  this  he  said,  not  be- 
cause he  cared  for  the  poor,  but  because  he  was  a 
thief,  and  held  the  purse,  and  carried  what  was  put*» 
in  it.    (7)  But  Jesus  said :  Let  her  alone ;  she  hath 
kept  it  for  the  day  of  my  burial.    (8)  For  the  poor 
are  always  with  you,  but  1  am  not  with  you  always. 
—(9)  And  great  multitudes  of  the  Jews  heard  that    9 
he  was  there:   and  they  came,  not  only  on  ac- 
count of  Jesus,  but  also  that  they  might  see  La25- 
arus,  whom  he  raised  from  the  dead.    (10)  And  10 
the  chief  priests  deliberated  about  killing  even 
Lazarus:  (11)  because  many  of  the  Jews,  on  his  11 
accojmt,  went  and  believed  in  Jesus. 
""^Lnd  the  next  day,  a  great  multitude  who  had  12 
come  to  the  feast,  when  they  heard  that  Jesus  was 
coming  to  Jerusalem,  (13)  took  boughs  of  palm-  13 
trees,  and  went  out  to  meet  him.     And  they  cried, 
and  said:  Hosanna,*^  Blessed  is  he  that'cometh  in 
the  name  of  the  Lord,  the  king  of  Israel  I   (14)  And  14 
Jesus  found  an  ass,  and  sat  upon  it ;  as  it  is  written, 
(15)  Fear  not,  daughter  of  Sion.    Behold,  thy  king  15 
Cometh  to  thee;   and  he  rideth  upon  a  colt,  the 
foal  of  an  ass.    (16)  These^things  understood  not  16 
his  disciples,  at  that  time;   but  when  Jesus  was 
glorified,  then  his  disciples  remembered  that  these 
things  were  written  of  him,  and  that  they  did  them 
to  hSn.— (17)  And  the  multitude  that  had  been  with  17 
him,  testified  that  he  had  called  Lazarus  from  the 
jrave,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead.     (18)  And  18 
lOT  this  reason,  great  multitudes  went  out  to  meet 
him,  as  they  had  heard  that  he  wrought  this  sign. 
(19)  But  the  Pharisees  said,  one  to  another:  Do  19 
ye  see,  that  ye  are  gaining  nothing?    For,  lo,  the 
whole  world  is  going  after  him. 

And  there  were  also  among  the  people,  some  20 
who  had  come  up  to  worship  at  the  feast.  (21)  These  21 
came,  and  approached  Philip,  who  was  of  Bethsai- 
da  in  Galilee,  and  said  to  him:  My  lord,  we  arc 
desirous  to  see  Jesus.     (22)  Philip  came  and  told  22 
Andrew;    and   Andrew   and   Philip  told  Jesus. 

(23)  And  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them:  The  28 
hour  is  come  that  the  Son  cf  man  should  be  glorified. 

(24)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  a  kernel  of  24 
wheat,  unless  it  fall  and  die  in  the  ground,  remaineth 
alone;  but  if  it  die,  it  produceth  numerous  fruitSi  ' 


Digitized^by 


Google 


/OHN,   XII. 


193 


26 


29 


38 
34 


25  (25)  He  that  loveth  his  life,^  will  lose  it;  and  he 
that  hateth  his  life,  in  this  world,  will  preserve  it 
unto  life®  everlasting.  (26)  K  any  one  is  servant 
to  me,  he  will  come  after  me ;  and  where  I  am, 
there  also  will  my  servant  be.    Him  that  serveth 

27  me,  will  the  Father  honor.  (27^  Behold,  now  is 
my  soid^  troubled;  and  what  snail  I  say?  Mjr 
Father,  deliver  me  from  this  hour?    But  for  this 

28  verjr  cause,  came  I  to  this  hour.  (28)  Father, 
glorify  thy  name  I  And  a  voice  was  heard  from 
heaven :  I  have  glorified  [it] ;  and  I  will  glorify 
fit]  again.  (29J  And  the  multitude  standing  by, 
heard  [it];  ana  they  said:  There  was  thunder. 
But    others   said:    An    angel    spoke  with    him. 

80  (80)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  them :  This  voice 

31  was  not  for  my  sake,  but  for  yours.  (31)  Now  is 
the  judgment  of  this  world :  now  the  rulerfif  of  this 

82  world  is  cast  out  (32)  And  I,  when  I  am  lifted 
up  from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  to  me. 
(33)  And  this  he  said,  to  show  by  what  manner  of 
death,  he  was  to  die. — (84)  The  multitude  said  to 
him :  We  have  heard  from  the  law,  that  the  Mes- 
siah abideth  for  ever :  [and]  how  savest  thou,  that 
the  Son  of  man  is  to  oe  lifted  up  r    Who  is  this 

35  Son  of  man  ?  (85)  Jesus  said  to  them :  A  short 
time  longer,  the  light  is  with  you.  Walk,  while  ye 
have  the  light^  lest  the  darkness  overtake  you.  He 
that  walkem  in  the  dark,  knoweth  not  wnither  he 

86  goeth.  (86)  While  the  light  is  with  you,  confide 
m  the  light ;  that  ye  may  be  children  of  the  light. 
— These  things  said  Jesus,  and  departed,  and  con- 
cealed himself  from  them. 

87  And  although  he  wrought  all  these  signs  before 

88  them,  they  believed  him  not ;  (88)  that  the  word 
of  Isaiah  the  prophet  might  be  fulfilled,  who  said: 
My  Lord;  who  nath  believed  our  report?    And 

89  to  whom  is  the  arm  of  the  Lord  revealed  ?  (39)  For 
this  reason  they  could  not  believe,  because  Isaiah 

40  said  again :  (40)  They  have  blinded  their  eyes,  and 
darkened  their  hearts;  that  they  might  not  see 
with  their  eyes,  and  understand  with  their  heart, 
and    be    converted;    and    I    should   heal    them. 

41  (41)  These  things  spake  Isaiah,  when  he  saw  his 

42  glory,  and  spoke  of  him.  (42)  And  of  the  chiefs^ 
also,  many  believed  on  him ;  out  on  account  of  the 
Fhmsees,  they  did  not  confess  [him],  lest  they 


Sy. 


«  Sy.  IjoO Jl 


Sy  1m^^ 


u 


Digitized  by 


Google 


194 


JOHN,   XIII. 


or,  save. 


Sy.  ]<  ^rrs 


•>  Gr.  Simon  Pe- 
ter, 


should  be  put  out  of  the  synagogue ;  (48)  for  they  43 
loved  the  praise  of  men,  more  than  the  praise  oi 
God. — (44^  And  Jesus  cried,  and  said:  He  that  44- 
believeth  in  me,  believeth  not  in  me,  but  in  him 
that  sent  me.    (45)  And  he  that  seeth  me,  seeth  45 
him  that  sent  me.     (^46)   I  have  cx)me  into  the  46 
world,  a  light,  that  whoever  believeth  in  me,  might 
not  abide  in  darkness.    (47)  And  whoever  shall  47 
hear  my  words,  and  not  observe  them,  I  judge  him 
not;  for  I  did  not  come  to  judge  the  world,  but  to 
vivify*  the  world.     (48)   Whoever  rejecteth  me,  48 
and  receiveth  not  my  words,  there  is  one  to  judge 
him ;  the  word  which  I  speak,  will  judge  him,  at 
the  last  day.    (49J  For  I  have  not  spoken  from  49 
myself;  but  the  Father  who  sent  me,  he  gave  me 
commandment,  what  I  should  speak,  and  what  I 
should  say.    (50)  And  I  know  that  his  command-  50 
ment  is  life*^  eterhal.  Therefore,  these  things  which 
I  speak,   as  my  Father  hath  said  to  me,  so  I 
speak. 

And  before  the  feast  of  the  passover,  Jesus  JLLLL 
knew  that  the  hour  had  come  when  he  should  de- 

{)art  from  this  world  unto  the  Father.    And  he 
oved  his  own  [people],  who  were  in  the  world; 
and  he  loved  them  unto  the  end.    (2)  And  when    2 
the  supper  was  passed,  it  had  been  injected  by 
Satan*  mto  the  heart  of  Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of 
Simon,  to  betr^  him.    (3)  And  Jesus,  because  he    ft 
knew  that  the  Father  had  given  all  things  into  his 
hands ;  and  that  he  came  out  from  the  Father,  and 
was  going  to  God;  (4)  arose  from  the  supper,  and    4 
laid  aside  his  long  garments,  and  took  a  linen  cloth, 
and  wrapped  it  about  his  loins;  (5)  and  poured    5 
water  into  a  wash-basin,  and  began  to  wash  the  feet 
of  his  disciples :  and  he  wiped  them  with  the  linen 
cloth  with  which  he  had  girded  his  loins.     (6)  And     6 
when  he  came  to  Simon  Cephas,  *»  Simon  said  to 
him :  Dost  thou,  my  Lord,  wash  my  feet  for  me  ? 
(7)  Jesus  answered,  and  said  to  him :  What  I  do,     7 
thou  understandest  not  now:  but  hereafter  thou 
wilt  understand.    (8)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him :     8 
Never  shalt  thou  wash  my  feet.    Jesus  said  to  him : 
Unless  I  wash  thee,  thou  hast  no  part  with  me. 
(9)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him :  Then,  my  Lord,  not    9 
my  feet  only  shalt  thou  wash,  but  also  my  hands 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XIIL 


195 


Sy.  U^fi) 


'Sy. 


Sy. 


10  and  my  head  (10)  Jesus  said  to  him:  He  that 
hath  bathed,«  needeth  not  but  to  wash  his  feet;  for 
he  is  all  clean.     And  ye  also  are  clean ;  but  not  all 

11  of  YQn^,/ll\  For  Jesus  knew,  who  would  betray 
mm: therefore  he  said,  Ye  are  not  all  clean. — 

12  (12)  And  when  he  had  washed  their  feet,  he  re- 
sumed his  long  garments,  <i  and  reclined.  And  he 
said  to  them :  Understand  ye  what  I  have  done  to 

13  you  ?     (13)  Ye  call  me,  Our  Rabbi,  and  Our  Lord ; 

14  and  ye  speak  well;  for  I  am  so.  (14)  If  then  I, 
vour  Lord  and  your  Eabbi,  have  washed  your  feet, 
how  much  more  ought  ye  to  wash  the  feet  of  one 

15  another?    (15)  For  I  have  given  you  this  example, 

16  that  ye  might  do,  as  I  have  done  to  you.  ^6) 
Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  no  servant  is 
greater  than  his  lord ;   and  no  legate®  is  greater 

17  than  he  who  sent  him.     (17)  If  ve  know   these 

18  things,  happy  will  ye  be  if  ye  do  them.  (18)  Not 
of  you  all,  do  I  speak:  I  know  whom  I  have 
chosen.  But  that  tne  scripture  may  be  fulfilled, 
He  that  eateth  bread  with  me,  hath  Ufted  his  heel 

19  against  me.  (19)  From  this  time,  I  tell  you,  before 
it  occurs,  that  when  it  shall  occur,  ye  may  know 

20  that  I  am  he.  (20)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to  you : 
He  that  receiveth  him  whom  I  fiend,  receiveth  me; 
and  he  that  receiveth  me,  receiveth  him  that  sent 
me. 

21  Thesethings  said  Jesus,  and  he  was  agitated  in 
his  spirit ;f  and  he  testified,   and  said:   Verily,  ' Sy.  ou - 
verily,  I  say  to  you.  That  one  of  you  will  betray 

22  me.     (22J  And  the  disciples  stared  at  one  another : 

23  because  tneyknew  not,  of  whom  he  spake.  (23)  And 
there  was  one  of  his  disciples,  who  waa  reclining 

24  on  his  bosom,  he  whom  Jesus  loved ;  (24)  to  him 
Simon  Cephas  beckoned,  that  he  should  ask  him, 

25  who  it  was  of  whom  he  spoke.  (25)  And  that 
disciple  fell  upon  the  breast  of  Jesus,  and  said  to 

26  him:  My  Lord,  which  is  he?  (26)  Jesus  an- 
swered and  said:  He  it  is,  to  whom  I  give  the 
bread  when  I  have  dipped  it.  And  Jesus  dipped 
the  bread,  and  gave  it  to  Judas  Iscariot,  the  son  of 

27  Simon.  (27)  And  after  the  bread,  then  Satan 
entered  into  him.     And  Jesus  said  to  him :  What 

28  thou  doest,  do  quickly.  (28)  And  no  one  of  those 
reclining,   knew,  wherefore  he  said  this  to  him. 

29  (29)  For  some  of  them  supposed,  because  the  purse 


Digitized  by 


Google 


196 


JOHN,   XIV. 


hSy. 

Ota  oi^ 


was  in  the  hands  of  Judas,  that  Jesus  expressly 
charged  hun  to  buy  something  needful  for  the 
feast)  or  that  he  should  give  something  to  the  poor. 
(80)  And  Judas  took  the  bread  at  once,  and  went  8C 
out  of  the  house.  And  it  was  night  when  he  went 
out 

And  Jesus  said :  Now  is  the  Son  of  man  glori-  81 
fied;v  and  God  is  glorified  in  him.    (82)  And  if  82 
God  is  glorified  in  him,  God  will  glority  him  in 
himself;**  and  will  glorify  him  speemly.    (83)  My  83 
children,  a  little  longer  I  am  with  you;  and  ye 
will  seek  for  me;   iEtnd,  as  I  said  to  the  Jews, 
Whither  I  go  ye  cannot  come,  so  I  now  say  to  you. 
(84)  A  new  commandment  I  give  to  you,  that  ye  84 
be  affectionate  to  each  other.    As  I  have  loved 
you,  do  ye  also  love  one  another.    (35)  Bv  this  85 
will  every  one  know  that  ye  are  my  disciples,  if 
ye  have  love  for  each  other.— (86)  Simon  Cephas  36 
said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  whither  goest  thou  ?    Je- 
sus .answered,  and  said  to  him :  W  hither  I  go,  thou 
canst  not  now  come  after  me ;  but  thou  wilt  at  last 
come.    (37)  Simon  Cephas  said  to  him :  My  Lord,  87 
why  can  I  not  come  after  thee?     I  would  lay 
down  my  life  for  thee.    (38)  Jesus  said  to  him:  88 
Wouldst  thou  lay  down  thy  life  for  me?    Verily, 
verily,  I  say  to  thee.  The  cock  will  not  crow,  until 
thou  hast  three  times  denied  me. 

Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled :  believe  in  XTV. 
Gk)d,  and,  believe  in  me.     (2)  There  are  many    2 
mansions  in  the  house  of  my  Father:  and  if  not,  I 
would  have  told  you ;  for  1  go  to  prepare  a  place 
for  you.    (8)  And  if  I  go  to  prepare  for  you  a    8 
place,  I  will  come  again  and  take  you  to  myself; 
that  where  I  am,  there  ye  may  be  also.    (4)  And    4 
whither  I  go,  ye  know ;  and  the  way  ye  know. — 
(5)  Thomas  said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  we  know  not    5 
wnither  thou  goest;  and  how  can  we  know  the 
way?    (6^  Jesus  said  to  him:  I  am  the  way,  and    6 
truth,  ana  life:  no  one  cometh  unto  my  Father, 
but  by  me.    (7)  If  ye  had  kn9wn  me,  ye  woula    7 
also  have  known  my  Father:  and  henceforth,  ye 
know  him,  and  have  seen  him.^8)  Philip  said  to    8 
him:  Our  Lord,  show  us  the  Father,  and  it  wiU 
suffice  for  us.     (9)  Jesus  said  to  him:   Have  I    9 
been  all  this  time  with  you,  and  hast  thou  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XIV. 


197 


from  Qrl 


known  me,  Philip?    He  that  seeth  me,  seeth  the 
Father :  and  how  say  est  thou,  Show  us  the  Father  ? 

10  (10^  Believest  thou  not,  that  I  am  in  my  Father, 
ana  my  Father  in  me?    And  the  words  which  I 
speak,  I  speak  not  firom  myself:  but  my  Father,  •  Sy. 
who  dwelleth  in  me,*  he    doeth    these    works.    ^SoL  oAi 

11  (11)  Believe,  that  I  am  in  my  Father,  and  my 
Famer  in  me.    And  if  not,  believe,  at  least,  on 

12  account  of  the  works.    (12)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
you :  He  that  believeth  in  me,  the  works  which 
do,  will  he  also  do.    And  greater  than  these  will 

18  he  do,  because  I  go  unto  my  Father.  (IS)  And 
what  ve  shall  ask  m  my  name,  I  will  do  for  you ; 

14  that  the  Father  may  be  glorified  in  his  Son.  (14) 
And  if  ye  shall  ask  of  me,  in  my  name,  I  will  do 
fit], — (15)  If  ye  love  me,  keep  my  commands. 
(16)  And  I  will  ask  of  my  Father,  and  he  will 
give  vou  another  Comforter,  *>  that  he  may  be  with 
you  for  ever,  (17)  the  Spirit  of  truth ;  whom  the 
world  cannot  receive,  because  it  seeth  him  not,  and 
knoweth  him  not:  but  ye  know  him,  because  he 

18  abideth  with  you,  and  is  in  you.  (18)  I  shall  not 
leave  you  orphans:  for  I  shall  come  to  you  in 
little  while.  (19)  And  the  world  will  not  see  me ; 
but  ye  will  see  me.  Because  I  live,  ye  will  live 
also.  ^0)  In  that  day  ye  will  know,  that  I  am  in 
my  Father;  and  that  ye  are  in  me,  and  I  in  you. 

21  (21)  He,  with  whom  are  my  commands,  and  who 
keepeth  them,  he  it  is  that  loveth  me.  And  he 
that  loveth  me,  will  be  loved  by  my  Father :  and 
I  will  love  him,  and  will  manifest  myself  to  him. 

22  — (22)  Judas, — not  Iscariot, — said  to  him:  My 
Lord,  how  is  it  that  thou  art  to  manifest  thyself  to 

23  us,  and  not  to  the  world?  (28)  Jesus  answered, 
and  said  to  him :  He  that  loveth  me,  observeth  my 
instruction ;«  and  my  Father  will  love  him,  and  we 
will  come  to  him,  and  make  our  abode  with  him. 

24  (24)  But  he  that  loveth  me  not,  observeth  not  mj 
instruction.    And  the  instruction  which  ve  hear,  is 

26  not  mine,  but  the  Father's  who  sent  me. — (25)  These 
things  have  I  said  to  you,  while  I  was  with  you. 

26  (26)  But  the  Comforter,  the  Holy  Spirit,  whom  the 
Father  will  send  in  my  name,  ne  will  teach  you 
every  thing,  and  will  remind  you  of  all  that  I  say  to  ^  g    )^^\^ 

27  you.    (27)  Peace^  I  leave  with  you ;  my  peace  I      ^'  ' 
give  to  you.    It  is  not  as  the  world®  giveth,  that  I  •  Sy.  V^V^. 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


16 
16 

17 


19 
20 


®   or,  discourse. 


198 


JOHN,   XV. 


'  Sy.  . 


•'  Sy.  words. 


^  or,  lovers. 


Sy.  u^IOmS 


28 


29 


give  to  you.  Let  not  your  heart  be  troubled,  nor 
be  afraid.  (28)  Ye  have  heard  what  I  said  to 
you  that  I  so  away,  and  come  [again]  to  you.  If 
ye  had  loved  me,  ye  would  have  rejoiced,  that  I  go 
to  my  Father ;  for  my  Father  is  greater  than  L 
(29^  And  now,  lo,  I  have  told  you,  before  it  occur- 
retn ;  so  that  when  it  shall  have  occurred,  ye  may 
believe.  (30)  Hereafter  I  shall  not  converse  mucn  30 
with  you  j  for  the  ruler**  of  this  world  cometh,  and 
hath  nothing  in  me.  (31)  But  that  the  world?  may  31 
know,  that  I  love  my  Father,  and  as  my  Father 
commanded  me,  so  I  do.    Arise;  let  us  go  hence. 

I  am  the  true  vine ;  and  my  Father  is  the  culti-XV, 
vator.  (2)  Every  branch  in  me,  which  yieldeth  2 
not  fruits,  he  taketh  it  away:  and  that  which 
yieldeth  fruits,  he  cleanseth  it,  that  it  may  yield 
more  fruits.  (3)  Ye  henceforth  are  clean,  on  ac-  3 
count  of  the  discourse  I  have  held  with  you. 
(4)  Abide  in  me,  and  I  in  you.  As  the  branch  4 
cannot  yield  fruits  of  itself,  unless  it  abide  in  the 
vine;  so  also,  neither  can  ye,  unless  ye  abide  in 
me.  (5)  I  am  the  vine,  and  ye  are  the  branches. 
He  that  abideth  in  me,  and  I  in  him,  he  yieldeth 
much  fruit;  for  without  me,  ye  can  do  nothing. 
(6)  And  if  a  man  abide  not  in  me,  he  is  cast  forth 
as  a  withered  branch ;  and  they  gather  it  up,  and 
cast  it  into  the  fire  to  be  burned.  (7)  But  if  ye 
shall  abide  in  me,  and  my  instructions^  shall  abide 
in  you,  whatever  ye  shall  be  pleased  to  ask,  it  will 
be  given  to  you.— (8)  In  this  is  the  Father  glori- 
fied, that  ye  bear  much  fruit;  and  ye  will  be  my 
disciples.  (9)  As  my  Father  hath  loved  me,  I  also 
have  loved  you :  abide  ye  in  the  love  of  me.  (10)  If 

ire  shall  keep  my  commands,  ye  will  abide  in  the 
ove  of  me,  as  I  have  kept  the  commands  of  my 
Father,  and  abide  in  his  love.  (11)  These  things 
have  I  spoken  to  you,  that  my  joy  may  be  in  you, 
and  that  your  joy  may  be  complete.  (12)  This  is 
my  command,  that  ye  love  one  another,  as  I  have 
loved  you.  (13)  There  is  no  greater  love  than 
this,  that  a  man  lay  down  his  life  for  his  friends.** 
(14)  Ye  are  my  friends,  if  ye  do  all  that  I  command  14 
you.  (15)  I  no  longer  call  you  servants;  because  15 
a  servant  knoweth  not  what  his  lord  doeth :  but  I 
have  called  you  my  friends  ;<5  because,  whatever  I 


6 


6 


8 


9 
10 


11 

12 


13 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XVI. 


199 


have  heard  from  my  Father,  I  have  made  known 

16  -to  jou.  (16)  It  is  not  ye  that  chose  me,  but  I  that 
have  chosen  you;  and  I  have  appointed  you,  that 
ye  also  should  go  and  yield  frmts,  and  that  your 
fruits  should  continue;  so  that  whatever  ye  may 
ask  of  my  Father  in  my  name,  he  may  giv6  it  you. 

17  (17)  These  things  I  command  you,  that  ye  should 

18  love  one  another. — (18^  And  ii  the  world  hate  you, 

19  know  ye,  that  it  hatea  me  before  you.  (19)  And 
if  ye  were  of  the  world,  the  world  would  love  what 
is  of  it.  But  ye  are  not  of  the  world,  for  I  have 
chosen  you  out  of  the  world ;  for  this  cause,  the 

20  world  hateth  you.  (20)  Eemember  the  word  that 
I  spoke  to  you,  That  there  is  no  servant,  who  is 
greater  than  his  lord.  If  they  have  persecuted  me, 
they  will  also  persecute  you ;  and  if  they  have  ob- 
served my  teaching,  they  will  also  observe  yours. 

21  (21)  But  all  these  things  will  they  do  to  you,  on 
account  of  my  name,  because  they  know  not  him 

22  that  sent  me.  (22)  If  I  had  not  come  and  dis- 
coursed with  them,  sin  would  not  have  been  to 
them;  but  now  there  is  no  excuse  for  their  sins. 

28  (23)  He  that  hateth  me,  hateth  my  Father  also. 

24  (24)  If  I  had  not  wrought  before  them  works  which 
no  other  person  ever  did,  sin  would  not  have  been 
to  them :  but  now  they  have  seen,  and  have  hated, 

25  both  me  and  my  Father ;  (26)  so  that  in  them  will 
be  fulfilled  the  word  which  is  written  in  their  law : 

26  They  hated  me,  without  a  cause. <* — (26)  But  when 
the  Comforter  shall  come,  whom  I  will  send  to  you 
from  my  Father,  that  Spirit  of  truth  who  proceed- 

27  eth  from  the  Father,  He  will  testify  of  me.  (27) 
And  do  ye  also  testify ;  for  ye  have  been  with  me 
from  the  beginning. 

XVL    These  things  have  I  said  to  you,  that  ye  may 

2  not  be  stumbled.  (2)  For  they  will  eject  you  from 
their  synagogues;  and  the  hour  will  come,  that 
whoever  shall  kill  you,  will  suppose  that  he  pre- 

3  senteth  an  offering  to  God. — (3)  And  these  things 
will  they  do,  because  they  have  not  known  either 

4  my  Father,  or  me.  (4)  These  things  have  I  spoken 
to  you,  that  when  the  time  of  them  cometh,  ye  may 
recollect,  that  I  told  you  of  them.  And  I  did  not 
tell  you  these  things  from  the  beginning,  because  I 

6  was  with  you.    (5)  But  now,  I  am  gomg  to  Him 


gratditously. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


200 


^OHN,    XVL 


^  oTf  rebuke. 

« Sy.  )jao}l 


Sj. 


Sy-lmJiJO 


that  sent  me ;  and  none  of  jou  asketh  me,  Whither 

§oest  thou?  (6)  And  because  I  have  told  you 
iiese  things,  sorrow  hath  come  and  hath  filled  your 
hearts,  m  But  I  tell  you  the  truth,  that  it  is 
profitable  lor  you  that  I  go  away ;  for,  if  I  go 
not  away,  the  Comforter*  will  not  come  to  you; 
but  if  I  go,  I  will  send  him  to  you.  (8)  And  when 
he  is  come,  he  will  oonvict*>  the  world  of  sin,  and 
of  righteousness,  and   of  judgment    (9)   Of  sin, 

ind  of  righ- 


8 

9 
10 


because  they  believe  not  in  me :  (10)  am 
teousness,  because  I  go  to  my  Father,  and  ye  see 
me  no  more :  (11^  and  of  judgment,  because  the  11 
ruler«^  of  this  world  is  judged.    (12)  Moreover,  I  12 
have  much  to  say  to  you:  but  ve  cannot  compre- 
hend [it]  now.    (13^  But  when  tne  Spirit  of  truth.  18 
shall  come,  he  will  lead  you  into  all  the  truth. 
For  he  will  not  speak  from  his  own  mind ;   but 
whatever  he  heareth,  that  will  he  speak :  and  he 
will  make  known  to  you  things  to  come.     (14)  He  14 
will  glorify  me ;  because  he  will  receive  of  what  is 
mine,  and  will  show  [it]  to  you.    (15)  Whatever*^  15 
the  Father  hath,  is  mine:  therefore  said  I  to  you, 
that  he  will  receive  of  what  is  mine,  and  will  snow 
[it]  to  you. — (16)  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  16 
see  me ;  and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see 
me;  because  I  go  to  the  Father.    (17)  And  his  dis-  17 
dples  said  one  to  another :  What  is  this  that  he 
saith  to  us,  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  see  me, 
and  again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see  me,  because 
I  go  to  mv  Father?    (18)  And  they  said:  What  18 
is  this  little  while,  of  which  he  speaketh?     We 
know  not  what  he  saith.    (19).  And  Jesus  knew,  19 
that  they  desired  to  ask  him ;  and  he  said  to  them : 
Are  ye  debating  with  each  other,  of  what  I  said  to 
you,  A  little  while,  and  ye  will  not  see  me,  and 
again  a  little  while,  and  ye  will  see  me?  (20)  Verily,  20 
verily,  I  say  to  you.  That  ye  will  weep  and  lament : 
and  the  world  will  rejoice,  while  to  you  will  be 
sorrow.    But  your  sorrow  will  be  turned  to  joy. 
(21)  A  woman,  in  bringing  forth,  hath  sorrow,  for  21 
the  day  of  her  travail  hath  come :  but  when  she 
hath  brought  forth  a  son,  she  remembereth  not  her 
anguish,  because  of  the  ioy  that  a  human  being«  is 
born  into  the  world.     (22)  Ye  also  now  have  sor-  22 
row ;  but  I  will  see  you  again,  and  your  heart  will 
rejoice,  and  no  one  will  deprive  you  of  your  joy. 


Digitized  bv 


Google 


JOHN,   XVIL 


201 


28 


24 


^3)  And  in  that  day  ye  will  ask  me  nothing. 
V  erily,  verily,  I  say  to  you,  That  whatsoever  ye 
shall  ask  of  my  Father  in  my  name,  he  will  pve  to 
you.  (24)  Hitherto  ye  have  asked  nothing  in  my 
name.  Ask,  and  ye  will  receive;  that  your  joy 
26  may  be  complete.— (25)  These  things  have  I  spoken 
to  vou  in  allegories  'J  but  the  hour  will  come,  when 
I  shall  not  speak  to  you  in  allegories,  but  I  will 

26  speak  to  jrou  plainly  of  the  Father.  (26)  In  that 
day  ye  will  ask  in  my  name ;  and  I  do  not  say  to 

27  you,  that  I  will  pray  to  the  Father  for  you ;  (27^  for 
the  Father  himself  loveth  you,  because  ye  nave 
loved  me,  and  have  believed  that  I  proceeded  from 

28  the  presence  of  the  Father.  (28)  I  proceeded  forth 
from  before  the  Father,  and  came  into  the  world ; 
and  again  I  leave  the  world,  and  go  to  the  Father. 

29  — (29)  His  disciples  say  to  him:  Lo,  now  thou 
[^>eakest  plainly,  and  tnou  utterest  no  allegory. 

80  (30^  Now  know  we,  that  thou  knowest  every  thing  ;fir 
ana  thou  hast  no  need,  that  any  one  should  ask 
thee :  by  this  we  believe,  that  thou  didst  proceed 

31  from  God.  (31)  Jesus  said  to  them :  Do  ye  believe  ? 

32  (32)  Behold,  the  hour  cometh,  and  hath  now  come, 
when  ye  will  be  dispersed,  each  to  his  place ;  and 
ye  will  leave  me  alone.  But  I  am  not  alone,  for 
the  Father  is  with  me.  (33)  These  things  have  I 
said  to  you,  that  in  me  ye  might  have  peace.  In 
the  world  ye  will  have  trouble :  but,  take  courage, 
I  have  vanquished  the  world. 

X.V1L  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  lifted  up  his 
eyes  to  heaven,  and  said :  My  Father,  the  hour  is 
come :  glorify  thy  Son,  that  thy  Son  may  glorify 

2  thee.  (2)  As  thou  hast  given  him  authority*  over 
all  flesh,  that  he  might  give  life  eternal  to  as  many 

8  as  thou  hast  given  him.  (3^  And  this  is  life  eter- 
nal, that  they  may  know  tnee,  that  thou  art  the 
only  true  God,  and  whom  thou  hast  sent,  Jesus 

4  Messiah.  (4)  I  have  glorified  thee  on  the  earth ; 
the  work*>  which  thou  gavest  me  to  do,  I  have 

5  finished.  (5)  And  now,  my  Father,  glorify  thou 
me,  with  that  glory  which  I  had  with  thee  before 

6  the  world  was. — (6)  I  have  made  known  thy  name 
to  the  men,  whom  thou  gavest  me  from  the  world : 
thine  they  were,  and  thou  gavest  them  to  me ;  and 

7  they  have  kept  thy  word.     (7)  Now  I*^  have  known, 


88 


'  Sy.  ]L]]^n 


»  Sy. 


Sy.]lft\n( 


Sy.  ]^C^ 


Gr.  they. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


202 


JOHN,   XVIL 


d  or,  which 
name. 


Sy.  \}^]j 


Sy. 

^ocnA\Snn 


that  whatever  thou  hast  given  me,  was  from  thee. 

(8)  For,  the  words  thou  gavest  tome,  I  have  given    8 
to  them ;  and  they  have  received  them,  and  have 
known  certainly,  that  I  came  from  thy  presence ; 
and  they  have  believed  that  thou  didst  send  me. 

(9)  And  I  pray  for  them ;  it  is  not  for  the  world    9 
that  I  pray,  but  for  them  whom  thou  hast  given 
me,  for  they  are  thine.     (10)  And  all  that  is  mine  10 
is  thine,  and  what  is  thine  is  mine;  and  I  am  glori- 
fied in  them.    (11)  Henceforth  I  am  not  in  the  11 
world ;  but  these  are  in  the  world,  and  I  go  to  thee. 
Holy  Father,  keep  them  in  that  thy  name,  which^ 
thou  hast  given  to  me ;  that  they  may  be  one,  as 
we  are.    (12)  While  I  have  been  with  them  in  the  12 
world,  I  have  kept  them  in  thy  name.    Those  thou 
gavest  me,  have  I  kept;  and  none  of  them  is  lost, 
but  the  son  of  perdition,®  that  the  scripture  might 

be  fulfilled.    (13)  But  now  I  come  to  thee ;  and  13 
these  things  I  speak  in  the  world,  that  my  joy  may 
be  complete  in  them.    (14)  I  have  given  them  thy  14 
word:   and  the  world  hath  hated  them,  because 
they  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the 
world.    (15)  I  pray  not,  that  thou  wouldst  take  15 
them  out  of  the  world,  but  that  thou  wouldst  keep 
them  from  evil:     (16)  for  they  are  not  of  the  16 
world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world.    (17)  Father,  17 
sanctify  them  by  thy  truth,  thy  word  is  tne  truth. 
(18)  Aa  thou  didst  send  me  into  the  world,  so  have  18 
I  aiso  sent  them  into  the  world.    (19)  And  for  19 
their  sakes  I  sanctify  myself  that  they  also  may  be 
sanctified  by  the  truth.— (20)  And  it  is  not  for  20 
them  only  that  I  pray,  but  also  for  those  who 
shall   beheve   in   me    through    their   discourse;^ 
(21)  that  they  all  may  be  one ;  as  thou,  my  Father,  21 
[art]  in  me,  and  I  in  thee ;  that  they  also  may  be 
one  in  us ;  so  that  the  world  may  believe,  that  thou 
didst  send  me.     (22)  And  the  glory  which  thou  22 
gavest  me,  I  have  given  them;  that  they  may  be 
one,  as  we  are  one.    (23)  I  in  them,  ana  thou  in  23 
me ;  that  they  may  be  perfected  into  one ;  and  that 
the  world  may  know  that  thou  didst  send  me,  and 
that  thou  hast  loved  them  as  also  thou  hast  loved 
me.     (24)     Father,  I  desire  that  those  whom  thou  24 
hast  given  me,  may  also  be  with  me  where  I  am ; 
that  they  may  see  that  glory  of  mine  which  thou 
hast  given  me,  as  thou  lovedst  me  before  the  foan- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,    XVIII. 


203 


26  dation  of  the  world.  (25)  My  righteous  Father, 
the  world  hath  not  known  thee ;  but  I  have  known 
thee,  and  these  have  known,  that  thou  didst  send 

26  me.  (26)  And  I  have  made  known  to  them  thj 
name ;  and  I  will  make  it  known ;  so  that  the  love, 
with  which  thou  lovedst  me,  may  be  in  them,  and 
I  in  them. 

KVnL  These  things  spake  Jesus,  and  went  forth 
with  his  disciples  over  the  brook  Oedron,*  where 
there  was  a  garden,  into  which  he  and  his  disciples 

2  entered.  (2)  And  Judas  also,  the  betrayer,  knew 
the  place ;  because  Jesus  often  there  met  with  his 

3  disciples.  (3)  Then  Judas  received  a  regiment,  *> 
and  from  the  presence  of  the  chief  priests  and 
Pharisees  he  had  officials  ]^  and  he  came  to  the  place 

4  with  lanterns  and  lamps  and  weapons. — (4)  And 
Jesus,  as  he  knew  every  thing  that  was  to  befall 
him,  went  forth  and  said  to  them :  Whom  seek  ye? 

5  (5)  They  say  to  him :  Jesus  the  Nazarean.  Jesus 
said  to  them :  I  am  he.    And  Judas  the  betrayer 

6  was  also  standing  with  them.  (6)  And  when  Jesus 
said  to  them,  I  am  he,  they  drew  back  and  fell 

7  upon  the  ground.  (7)  And  again  Jesus  asked 
them:  Whom  seek  ye?    And  they  said :  Jesus  the 

8  Nazarean.  (8)  Jesus  said  to  them:  I  have  told 
you  that  I  am  he ;  and  if  ye  seek  me,  let  these  go 

9  away :  (9)  that  the  speech  might  be  fiilfilled,  which 
he  uttered :  Of  them,  whom  thou  hast  given  me,  I 

10  have  lost  not  even  one. — (10)  And  Simon  Cephas 
had  upon  him  a  sword ;  and  he  drew  it,  and  smote 
a  servant  of  the  high  priest,  and  cut  off  his  right 
ear.     And    the    servant's    name    was    Malchus.** 

11  (11)  And  Jesus  said  to  Oenhas:  Put  the  sword 
into  its  sheath.  The  cup  wnich  my  Father  hath 
given  me,  shall  I  not  drink  it? 

12  Then  the  regiment  and  the  chiliarchs®  and  the 
officials  of  the  Jews  laid  hold  of  Jesus,  and  bound 

13  him;  (13)  and  they  led  him  first  to  the  presence 
of  Annas  ;^  for  he  was  father-in-law  to  Caiaphas, 

14  who  was  the  high  priest  of  that  year.  (14)  And 
it  was  Caiaphas?  who  counselled  the  Jews,  that  it 
was  expedient,  one  man  should  die  for  the  people. 

15  -7(15)  And  Simon  Cephas  and  one  other  of  the 
disciples  went  after  Jesus.  And  that  other  disciple 
knew  the  high  priest ;  and  he  entered  with  Jesus 


Digitized  by 


•  Sy.  ^5,^ 


Sy-iigtml 
Gr.  (fitsTpa. 
Lat  cohors, 

Sy. 


Sy.^ilLO 

Sy. 
lW.'iNta 


Sy. 
f  Sy.  ^g^"^ 


Google 


204 


JOHN,    XVIll. 


^  Sj,hour. 
Lat.  Prceto- 


into  the  hall.    ri6)  But  Simon  stood  without  at  16 
the  door;  and  that  other  disciple,  who  knew  the 
high  priest,  went  out  and  spoke  to  the  doorkeeper, 
and  brought  in  Simon.    (17)  And  the  maid  who  17 
kept  the  door,  said  to  Simon:  Art  not  thou  also 
one  of  this  man's  disciples?    And  he  said:  I  am 
not    (18)  And  the  servants  and  officials  were  18 
standing,  and  had  placed  a  fire  to  warm  themselves. 
— (19)  And  the  high  priest  interrogated  Jesus  re-  19 
specting  his  disciples,  and  respecting  his  doctrine. 
(20)  And  Jesus  said  to  him:  I  have  discoursed  20 
openly  with  the  people,   and  have  at  all  times 
taught  in  the  synagogue  and  in  the  temple,  where 
all  the  Jews  assemble ;  and  I  have  uttered  nothing 
in  private.     (21)  Why  dost  thou  interrogate  me?  21 
Ask  them  who  have  heard,  what  I  said  to  them : 
lo,  they  know  what  I  have  said.    (22)  And  as  he  22 
said  these  thin^  one  of  the  officials  standing  by, 
smote  the  cheek  of  Jesus,  and  said  to  him :  Givest 
thou  such  an  answer  to  the  high  priest  7    (28)  Jesus  28 
replied,  and  said  to  him:  If  I  have  spoken  evil, 
bear  witness  of  that  evil ;  but  if  well,  why  smitest 
thou  me?    (24)  Now  Annas  had  sent  Jesus  bound  24 
to  Caiaphas  tne  high  priest— (25)  And  Simon  26 
Cephas  was  standing  and  warming  himself;   and 
they  said  to  him :  Art  not  thou  also  one  of  his  disci- 
ples? AndhedeDied,andsaid.  lamnot   (26)  And  26 
one  of  the  servants  of  the  high  priest,  a  kinsman 
of  him  whose  ear  Simon  cut  of^  said  to  him :  Did 
I  not  see  thee  with  him  in  the  garden?    (27)  And  27 
again  Simon  denied:   and  at  that  moment^  the 
cock  crew. 

And  they  led  Jesus  from  the  presence  of  Oaia-  28 
phas  unto  the  Prsetorium;*  and  it  was  morning. 
But  they  did  not  enter  the  Praetorium,  lest  they 
should  defile  themselves  before  they  had  eaten  the 
passover.    (29)  And  Pilate  went  forth  to  them  29 
without,  and  said  to  them :  What  accusation  have 
ye  against  this  man  ?    (80)  They  replied,  and  said  80 
to  him :  If  he  were  not  a  malefactor,  we  should  not 
have  delivered  him  up  to  thee.     (31)  Pilate  said  to  31 
them :  Take  ye  him,  and  judge  him  according  to 
your  law.     The  Jews  said  to  him :  It  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  put  a  man  to  death :  (82)  that  the  speech  32 
of  Jesus  might  be  fulfilled,  when  he  made  known 
by  what  death  he  was  to  die.    (83)  And  Pilate  88 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XIX. 


206 


went  into  the  Prsdtorium,  and  called  Jesus,  and 
said  to  him:  Art  thou  the  king  of  the  Jews? 
84  (84)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Say  est  thou  this  of  thyself 
86  or  have  others  said  [it]  to  thee  of  me  ?  (85)  rilate 
said  to  him :  Am  I  a  Jew  ?  Thy  countrymen  and 
the  chief  priests  have  delivered  thee  to  me.    What 

86  hast  thou  done  ?  (86)  Jesus  said  to  him :  My  king- 
dom is  not  of  this  world.  If  my  kingdom  were  of 
this  world,  my  servants  would  nave  fought,  that  I 
might  not  be  delivered  up  to  the  Jews :  but  now, 

87  my  kingdom  is  not  from  hence.  (87)  Pilate  said 
to  him :  Then  thou  art  a  kin^?  Jesus  said  to  him : 
Thou  hast  said,  that  I  am  a  king.  For  this  was  I 
bom ;  and  for  this  came  I  into  the  world,  that  I 
might  bear  testimony  to  the  truth.    Every  one  that 

88  is  of  the  truth,  heareth  mv  voice.  (38)  Pilate  said 
to  him :  What  is  the  truth  ?  ^  And  as  he  said  this, 
he  went  out  again  to  the  Jews,  and  said  to  them : 

89  I  find  not  any  crime  in  him.  (89)  And  ye  have  a 
custom  that  1  should  release  one  to  you  at  the  pass- 
over;  will  ye,  therefore,  that  I  release  to  you  this 

40  king  of  the  Jews?    (40)  And  they  all  cried  out, 

and  said:  Not  this  man,  but  Barabbas.^    Now  this 

XIX.  Barabbas  was  a  robber."" — ^XIX.  Then  Pilate 

2  scourged  Jesus.    (2)  And  the  soldiers  braided  a 

crown  of  thorns,  and.  put  it  on  his  head ;  and  they 

8  clothed  him  in  purple  garments:  (3)  and  they  said : 

Hail,^  king  of  the  Jews  I   and  smote  him  on  his 

4  cheeks.  (4)  And  Pilate  went  out  again,  and  said 
to  them :  Lo,  I  bring  him  out  to  you,  that  ye  may 
know  that  I  find  against  him  no  offence  whatever. 

5  (5)  And  Jesus  went  forth,  having  on  him  the 
crown  of  thorns,  and  the  purple  garments.    And 

6  Pilate  said  to  them :  Behold,  the  man  I  (6)  And 
when  the  chief  priests  and  officials  saw  him,  they 
cried  out,  and  said:  Hang^  him;  hang  him. 
Pilate  said  to  them:  Take  ye  him,  and  crucify ^^ 

7  him ;  for  I  find  no  offence  in  him.  (7)  The  Jews 
say  to  him :  We  have  a  law,  and,  according  to  our 
law,  he  deserveth  death,  because  he  made  nimself 

8  the  Son  of  God.     (8^  And  when  Pilate  heard  that 

9  declaration,  he  feared  the  more.  (9)  And  he  went 
again  into  the  Praetorium ;  and  he  said  to  Jesus : 
Whence  art  thou  ?    And  Jesus  gave  him  no  an- 

10  swer.  (10)  Pilate  said*  to  him :  Wilt  thou  not 
speak  to  me?    Knowest  thou  not,  that  I  have  au- 


kSy. 
l5i^  Olio 


>  Sy.  Id]  ue 


Sy.  Peace  tt 

thee. 


^Sy. 
»  Sy. 

acnof^no 


Digitized  by 


Google 


206 


JOHN,   XIX. 


<i97.«4a!1a 


Oaphiphtha. 
'Sy. 

S  87.  .jgdOLOll 


Sy. 

B  OaguUha. 


By.  ^ls.n^ 

Aallooai5o 


avuLnD 


thority  d  to  release  thee,  and  have  authority  to  cru- 
cify thee?    (11)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Thou  wouldst  11 
have  no  authority  at  all  over  me,  if  it  were  not 
ffiven  to  thee  from  on  high :  therefore  his  sin  who 
delivered  me  up  to  thee,  is  greater  than  thine. 
(12)  And  for  this  reason,  Pilate  was  disposed  to  12 
release  him.    But  the  Jews  cried  out :  If  thou 
release  this  man,  thou  art  not  Caesar's  friend :  for 
whoever  maketh  himself  a  king,  is  the  adversary 
of  Caesar,     f  13)  And  when  Pilate  heard  this  dec-  18 
laration,  he  brought  Jesus  forth,  and  sat  upon  the 
tribunal,  in  a  place  called  the  pavement  of  stones; 
but  in  Hebrew  it  is  called  Gabbatha.«     (14)  And  14 
it  was  the  preparation  for  the  passover ;  and  it  was 
about  the  sixth  hour.     And  he  said  to  the  Jews : 
Behold,   your  king.     (15)  But  they   cried  out:  15 
Away   with  him,   away   with   him;    hang^  him, 
hang  him.     Pilate  said  to  them :  Shall  I  crucify  g 
your  king?     The  chief  priests  said  to  him:   We 
have  no  king,  but  Caesar.    (16)  Then  he  delivered  16 
him  to  them,  that  they  might  crucify  him. 

And  they  took  Jesus,  and  led  him  away,  (17)  17 
bearing  his  cross,  to  a  place  called  a  Skull,  and  in 
Hebrew  called  Golgotha  ;h  (18")  where  they  cru-  18 
cified  him;  and  two  others  witn  him,  the  one  on* 
this  side,  and  the  other  on  that,  and  Jesus  in  the 
middle.    (19)  And  Pilate  also  wrote  a  tablet,  and  19 
affixed  it  to  nis  cross.    And  thus  it  was  written : 
Tms  IS  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  king  op  the  Jews. 
(20)  And  many  of  the  Jews  read  this  label ;  be-  20 
cause  the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified,  was 
near  to  Jerusalem  ;  and  it  was  written  in  Hebrew 
and  Greek  and  Latin.»    (21)  And  the  chief  priests  21 
said  to  Pilate :  Write  not  that  he  is  king  of  the 
Jews,  but  that  he  said  I  am  king  of  the  Jews. 
(22)  Pilate  said:   What  I  have  written,  I  have  22 
written. — (28)  And  the  soldiers,  when  they  had  23 
crucified  Jesus,  took  his  garments  and  made  four 
parcels  of  them,  a  parcel  for  each  of  the  soldiers. 
And  his  tunic  ^^  was  without  seam  from  the  top, 
woven   throughout.     (24)   And   they  said  one  to  24 
another :  We  will  not  rend  it,  but  will  cast  the  lot 
upon  it,  whose  it  shall  be.     And  the  scripture  was 
ftilfiUed,  which  said :  They  divided  my  garments 
among  them;  and  upon  my  vesture  they  cast  the 
lot     These  things  did  the  soldiers.-— (25)  And  26 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,    XIX. 


207 


26 


27 


there  were  standing  near  the  cross  of  Jesus,  his 
mother,  and  his  mother's  sister,  and  Mary  [the 
wife]  of  Cleophas,  and  Mary  Mi^alena.  (26)  And 
Jesus  saw  his  mother,  and  that  disciple  whom  he 
loved,  standing  by,  and  he  said  to  nis  mother : 
Woman,  behold,  thy  son.  (27)  And  he  said  to 
that  disciple:  Behold,  thy  mother.  And  from 
that  hour,  the  disciple  took  her  near  hims^l£ — 

28  (28)  After  these  things,  Jesus  knew  that  every 
thing  was  finished ;  and,  that  the  scripture  might 

29  be  fulfilled,  he  said:  I  thirst.  (29)  And  a  vessel 
was  standing  there,  full  of  vinegar.  And  they 
filled  a  sponffe  with  the  vinegar,  and  put  it  on  a 

30  hyssop  [stalk],  and  bore  it  to  his  mouth.  (80) 
And  when  Jesus  had  received  the  vinegar,  he 
said:  Lo;  Done.  And  he  bowed  his  he^  and 
yielded  up  his  spirit* 

81  And  because  it  was  the  preparation, «»  the  Jews 
said:  These  bodies  must  not  remain  all  night  upon 
the  cross :  because  the  sabbath  was  dawning; »  and 
the  day  of  that  sabbath  was  a  great  dav.  And 
they  requested  of  Pilate,  that  they  should  break 
the  legs  of  those  crucified,  and  take  them  down. 

82  (82)  And  the  soldiers  came,  and  broke  the  legs  of 
the  first,  and  of  the  other  that  was  crucified  with 

88  him.  (33)  But  when  they  came  to  Jesus,  they 
saw  that  he  was  already  dead ;  and  they  broke  not 

84  his  legs.  (84)  But  one  of  the  soldiers  thrust  a 
spear  into  his  side ;  and  immediately  there  issued 

85  out  blood  and  water.— (36)  And  he  who  saw  [it], 
hath  testified :  and  his  testimony  is  true:  ana  he 
knoweth,  that  he  speaketh  the  truth,  that  ye  also 

86  may  believe.  (36)  For  these  things  occurred,  that 
the  scripture  might  be  fulfilled,  which  said:  A 
bone  of  him  shall  not  be  broken.  (87)  And  again 
another  scripture,  which  saith :  They  will  look  on 
him,  whom  they  pierced. 

After  these  things,  Joseph  of  Bamath,  Tfor  he  was 
a  disciple  of  Jesus,  and  kept  concealea  through 
fear  of  the  Jews,)  requested  of  Pilate,  that  he  might 
take  away  the  body  of  Jesus.  And  Pilate  permit- 
ted. And  he  came,  and  bore  away  the  body 
of  Jesus.  (39)  And  there  came  also  Nicodemus, 
(he  who  previouslv  came  to  Jesus  by  night,)  and 
he  brought  with  him  a  compound  of  mvrrh  and 
40  aloes,  afi>ut  a  hundred  pounds.®    (40)  And  they 


87 


88 


89 


"» i.  e.  Friday. 
^  or,  coming  on. 


•  Sy.  ^84*^ 
=  Gr.  X[rp«u 


Digitized  by 


Google 


208 


JOHN,   XX. 


»   Sy.  known. 


bore  away  the  body  of  Jesus,  and  wound  it  in 
linens  ana  aromatics,  as  it  is  the  custom  of  the 
Jews  to  bury.  (41)  And  there  was  a  garden  in  41 
the  place  where  Jesus  was  crucified,  and  in  the 
garden  a  new  sepulchre  in  which  no  person  had 
ever  been  laid.  (42)  And  there  they  laid  Jesus,  42 
because  the  sabbath  had  commenced,  and  because 
the  sepulchre  was  near. 


And  the  first  day  of  the  week,  in  the  morning,  XX 
while  it  was  yet  dark,  Mary  Magdalena  came  to  the 
sepulchre :  and  she  saw  that  the  stone  was  removed 
firom  the  grave.    (2)  And  she  ran,  and  came  to    2 
Simon  Cephas,  ana  to  that  other  disciple  whom 
Jesus  loved,  and  said  to  them :  They  have  taken 
away  our  Lord  from  the  sepulchre,  and  I  know  not 
where  they  have  laid  him.    (8)  And  Simon  set    S 
out,  and  the  other  disciple,  and  tney  were  going  to 
the  sepulchre.    (4)  And  they  both  ran  together;     4 
but  that  disciple  outran  Simon,  and  came  first  to 
the  sepulchre.    (6)  And  he  looked  in,  and  saw  the    5 
linen  cloths  lying:  but  he  did  not  go  in.    (6)  And    6 
after  him  came  Simon ;  and  he  entered  the  sepul- 
chre, and  saw  the  linen  cloths  lying ;  (7)  and  the    7 
napkin,  that  had  been  wrapped  about  his  nead,  was 
not  with  the  linen  cloths,  but  was  folded  up,  and 
laid  in  a  place  by  itself.    (8)  Then  entered  also  the    8 
disciple  who  came  first  to  the  sepulchre ;  and  he 
saw,  and  believed.     (9)   For  they  had  not  jel    9 
learned*^  from  the  scriptures,  that  he  was  to  arise 
from  the  dead.     (10)   And  those  disciples  went  10 
away  again  to  their  place. — (11)   But  Mary  re-  11 
mained  standing  at  the  sepulchre,  and  weeping; 
and  as  she  wept,  she  looked  into  the  sepulchre, 
(12)  and  saw  two  angels  in  white,  who  were  sitting,  12 
one  at  the  pillows  and  one  at  the  feet,  where  the 
body  of  Jesus  was  laid.    (13)   And  they  said  to  18 
her:   Woman,  why  weepest  thou?     She  said  to 
them:  Because  they  have  taken  away  my  Lord, 
and   I  know    not  where    they  have    laid    him. 
(14)  Having  said  this,  she  turned  round,  and  saw  14 
Jesus  standing,  but  did  not  know  that  it  was  Jesus. 
{IS)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Woman,  why  weepest  thou?  15 
ana,  whom  dost  thou  seek?     And  she  supposed 
that  he  was  the  gardener:  and  she  said  to  him: 
My  lord,  if  thou  hast  borne  him  away,  tdl  me 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,    XX. 


209 


18 


19 


where  thou  hast  laid  him,  [and]  I  will  go  and  take 

16  him  away.  (16)  Jesus  said  to  her:  Mary  1  And 
she  turned,  and  said  to  him  in  Hebrew :  Ilabbuni  ;*> 

17  which  is  interpreted  Teacher.^  (17)  Jesus  said  to 
her:  Touch  me  not;  for  not  vet  have  I  ascended 
to  my  Father.  But  go  to  my  brethren,  and  say  to 
them :  I  ascend  to  my  Father  and  your  Father,  and 
to  mv  God  and  your  God.  (18)  Then  came  Mary 
Magdalena,  and  told  the  disciples  that  she  had  seen 
our  Lord ;  and  that  he  had  said  these  things  to  her. 

And  on  the  evening  of  that  first  day  of  the  wedj^ 
the  doors  being  shut  where  the  disciples  were,  for 
fear  of  the  Jews,  Jesus  came,  and  stood  in  die  midst 
of  them,  and  said  to  them :  Peace  be  with  you.^ 

20  (20^  Having  said  this,  he  showed  them  his  hands 
and  his  side.     And  the  disciples  rejoiced,  when 

21  they  saw  our  Lord.  (21)  And  Jesus  said  to  them : 
Peace  be  with  you.     As  my  Father  hath  sent  me, 

22  I  also  send  you.  (22)  And  as  he  said  these  things, 
he  breathed  on  them,  and  said  to  them:  Eeceive  ye 

28  the  Holy  Spirit  (28)  If  ye  shall  remit®  sins  to  anv 
one,  they  will  be  remitted  to  him ;  and  if  ye  shall 
retain^  f^hose]  of  any  one,  they  will  be  retained. 

But  Thomas,  who  was  called  the  Twin,f  one  of 
the  twelve,  was  not  there  with  them,  when  Jesus 
came.  (25)  And  the  disciples  said  to  him:  We 
have  seen  our  Lord.  But  he  said  to  them :  Unless 
I  see  in  his  hands  the  places  of  the  nails,  and  put 
my  fingers  into  them,  and  extend  my  hand  to  nis 

26  side,  I  will  not  believe.— (26)  And  aftier  eight  days, 
the  disciples  were  again  within,  and  Thomas  with 
them :  and  Jesus  came,  while  the  doors  were  closed, 
stood  in  the  midst,  and  said  to  them:   Peace  be 

27  with  you.  (27)  And  he  said  to  Thomas:  Reach 
hither  thy  finger,  and  look  at  my  hands ;  and  reach 
out  thy  hand  and  extend  it  to  ray  side:  and  be  not 

28  incredulous,  but  believing.  (28)  And  Thomas 
answered,  and  said  to  him:  My  Lord,  and  my 
Godl*>  (29)  Jesus  said  to  him:  Now,  when  thou 
hast  seen  me,  thou  believest :  blessed  are  they,  who 
have  not  seen  me,  yet  believe.— (80)  And  many 
other  signs  did  Jesus  before  his  disciples,  which  are 
not  written  in  this  book.  (81)  But  these  are  writ- 
tea,  that  ye  may  believe  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah, 
the  Son  of  God ;  and  that  when  ye  believe,  ye  may 

have  life  tter;:^!  by  his  name, 
u 


24 


26 


29 
30 


Sy. 

Sy 
•  Sy.  ]loV 


I 


Sy.  a^LD 


Digitized  by 


Google 


210 


JOHN,   XXI. 


^«r  1*  6^ 


•8f.u:^ 


After  these  things,  Jesus  showed  himself  again  XXL 
to  his  disciples,  at  the  sea  of  Tiberias:   and  he 
showed  himself  thus:   (2)   There  were  together*    2 
Simon  Cephas,  and  Thomas  called  the  Twin,  ana 
Nathaniel  who  was  of  Gana<^  in  Gulilee,  and  the 
sons'  of  Zebedee,  and  two  other  of  the  disciples. 
(8)  Simon  Oephas  said  to  them:  I  will  go  [and]    S 
catch  fishea    They  said  to  him :  We  will  go  with 
thee.    And  thej  went,  and  embarked  in  a  ship : 
and  that  night,  they  caught  nothing.     (4)  And    4 
when  it  "was  morning,  Jesus  stood  on  the  shore  of 
the  sea :  and  the  disciples  did  not  know  that  it  was 
Jesus.    (6^  And  Jesus  said  to  them:  Lads,^  have    5 
ye  any  tning  to  eat?     They  say  to  him:   No. 
(6)  He  said  to  them :  Oast  vour  net  on  the  right    6 
side  of  the  ship,  and  ye  will  nnd  them.    And  they 
cast:  and  they  could  not  draw  up  the  net,  because 
of  the  multitude  of  fishes  it  contained.    (7)  And    7 
that  disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  said  to  Oephas: 
l^at  is  our  Lord.     And  Simon,  when  he  heard 
that  it  was  our  Lord,  took  his  tunic,  and  girded  his 
loins,  (for  he  had  been  naked,)  and  threw  himself 
into  the  sea,  to  go  to  Jesus.    (8)  But  the  other    8 
disciples  came  in  the  ship,  (for  they  were  not  very 
fiur  from  the  land,  only  about  two  hundred  cubits,^ 
and  they  dragged  the  net  with  the  fishes     (9)  Ana    9 
when  tney  came  upon  the  land,  thay  saw  coals 
placed,  and  fish  laid  on  them,  and  bread.    (10)  And  10 
Jesus  said  to  them :    Bring  [some]  of  the  fishes, 
which  ye  have  just  caught     (11)   And  Simon  11 
Oephas  embarked,  and  drew  the  net  to  land,  full  of 
huge  fishes,  one  hundred  and  fifty  and  three.   And 
witn  all  this  weight,  the  net  was  not  rent — (12)  And  12 
Jesus  said  to  them :  Oome  and  dine.    And  no  one 
of  the  disciples  presumed  to  ask  him,  who  he  was ; 
for  they  knew  that  it  was  our  Lord.    (18)  And  13 
Jesus  came,  and  took  bread  and  fishes,  and  gave  to 
his  disciples.     (14)    This  is  the  third  time  that  14 
Jesus  appeared  to  his  disciples  when  he  had  arisen 
ficom  the  dead. 

And  when  they  had  dined,  Jesus  said  to  Simon  15 
Oephas:  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou  me,  more 
than  these  do  ?    He  said  to  him :  Yes,  my  Lord : 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee.    Jesus  said  to  him: 
Feed  my  lambs  for  me.    (16)  Again,  he  said  to  16 
him  the  second  time :  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JOHN,   XXL 


211 


thou  me  ?    He  said  to  him :  Yes,  my  Lord ;  thou 
knowest  that  I  love  thee.    Jesus  said  to  him :  Feed 

17  my  sheep  for  me.  (17)  Again,  Jesus  said  to  him 
the  third  time :  Simon,  son  of  Jonas,  lovest  thou 
me  ?  And  it  grieved  Cephas,  that  he  said  to  him 
the  third  time,  Lovest  thou  me ;  and  he  said  to 
him:  My  Lord,  thou  understandest^  all  things, 
thou  knowest  that  I  love  thee.    Jesus  said  to  him : 

18  Feed  my  sheep  for  me.  (18)  Verily,  verily,  I  say  to 
thee :  When  thou  wast  young,  thou  girdedst  thy 
own  loins,  and  walkedst  whither  it  pleased  thee : 
but  when  thou  shalt  be  old,  thou  wilt  extend  thy 
hands,  and  another  will  gird  thy  loins  for  thee,  and 
will    conduct    thee    whither    thou   wouldst    not 

19  (19)  And  this  he  said,  to  show  by  what  death  he 
was  to  glorify  God.    And  having  said  these  things, 

20  he  said  to  him:  Follow  me.-^20)  And  Simon 
turned  himself  and  saw  coming  after  him,  that 
disciple  whom  Jesus  loved,  who  fell  on  the  breast 
of  Jesus  at  the  supper,  and  said,  My  Lord,  who  is 

21  it  will  betray  theer  (21)  Him  Cephas  saw,  and 
said  to  Jesus:  My  Lord,  as  for  this  man,  what? 

22  (22)  Jesus  said  to  him :  K  I  will,  that  he  abide 
here  until  I  come,  what  [is  that]  to  thee  ?     Follow 

23  thou  me.  (23)  And  this  saying  went  forth  among 
the  brethren,  that  this  disciple  would  not  die. 
Yet  Jesus  did  not  say,  that  he  would  not  die;  but. 
If  I  will  that  he  abide  here  until  I  come,  what  [is 
that]  to  thee. 

24  This  is  the  disciple  who  hath  testified  of  all 
these  things,  and  haui  writteh  them :  and  we  know, 

26  that  his  testimony  is  true. — (25)  And  there  are  also 
many  other  things,  which  Jesus  did;  which,  if 
written  out  with  particularity,^  the  world  itself  as 
I  suppose,  would  not  suffice  for  the  books  that 
woufif  be  written. 


Can^pletian  of  the  Holy  Gomel,  ike  jannouncemeiU  of  John 
the  Evangelist;  which  he  uUerea,  in  Cheeky  at  Kfk^us, 


Sy  UIOm 


Sy.  one  by  one 


<-^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


<•  IftmiS^oi    >cDonoN    ]■  i,n\    <  ■  ■  i n? 
The  Book  of  Aets ;  that  is,  Narratives  of  the  Blessed  Legates: 

Compiled  by  Saint  Inke,  the  Eiangelist. 


"  or,  AposUei. 


bSy.)L>j 


>wU:^j 


The  former  book  have  I  written,  0  TheophUus, 
concerning  all  the  things  which  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah  began  to  do  and  teach,  (2)  until  the  day 
when  he  was  taken  up,  after  he  had  instructed 
those  legates*  whom  he  had  chosen  by  the  Holy 
Spirit.     (8)  To  whom  also  he  showed  himself  alive 
after  he  had  suffered,  by  numerous  signs,  during 
forty  days,  while  he  was  seen  by  them,  and  spoke 
of  the  kingdom  of  God.     (4)  And  when  he  had 
eaten  bread  with  them,  he  instructed  them  not  to 
depart  from  Jerusalem,  but  to  wait  for  the  promise 
of  the  Father,  which  (said  he)  ye  have  heard  from 
me.     (5)  For  John  baptized  with  water;  but  ye    5 
will  be  baptized  with  the  Holy  Spirit  after  not 
many  days. — (6)  And  the]^,  when  assembled,  asked    6 
him  and  said  to  him :  Our  Lord,  wilt  thou  at  this 
time  restore  the  kingdom  to  Ljrael?     (7)  He  said    7 
to  them:  It  is  not  yours,  to  know  the  time  or  times 
which  God  hath  placed  in  his  own  power.     (8)  But    8 
when  the  Holy  Spirit  shall  come  upon  you,  ye  will 
receive  energy,**  and  will  be  witnesses  for  me  in 
Jerusalem,  and  in  all  Judasa,  and  also  among  the 
Samaritans,   and  unto  the  ends  of  the  earth. — 
(9)  And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  while  they     9 
beheld  him,  he  was  taken  up,  and  a  cloud  received 
him,  and  he  was  hidden  from  their  eyes.     (lOJ  And  10 
while  they  were  looking  toward  heaven,  as  ne  de- 
parted, two  men  were  found  standing  near  them, 
m  white  garments,  (11)  and  saying  to  them:  Ye  1] 
Galilean  men,   why  stand  ye  and  look  toward 
heaven?     This  Jesus,  who  is  taken  up  from  you 
to  heaven,  will  so  come,  as  ye  have  seen  him  as- 
cend to  heaven. 


^YU^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    1. 

12  And  afterwards  they  returned  to  Jerusalem  from 
the  moimt  called  the  place  of  Olives,  which  was 
near  to  Jerusalem,  and  distant  from  it  about  seven^ 

13  furlongs.  (1§)  And  when  they  had  entered,  they 
went  to  an  upper  chamber ;  where  were  Peter,  and 
John,  and  James,  and  Andrew,  and  Philip,  and 
Thomas,  and  Matthew,  and  Bartholomew,  and 
James  the  son  of  Alpheus,  and  Simon  Zelotes,^ 

14  and  Judas  the  son  of  James.  (14)  All  these  uni- 
tedly persevered  in  prayer,  with  one  soul,«  together 
with  ihfi  women,  and  with  Mary  the  mother  of 

15  Jesus,  and  with  his  brothers.— (16)  And  in  those 
^Jays  stood  up  Simon  Cephas  in  the  midst  of  the 

disciples,  (the  persons  there  assembled  being  about 

16  one  nundred  and  twenty,)  and  said:  (16)  Men, 
brethren,  it  was  right^  that  the  scripture  should 
be  fulfilled,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  spake,  by  the 
mouth  of  David,  concerning  Judas  who  was  guide 

17  to  them  that  apprehended  Jesus.  (17)  For  he  was 
numbered  with  us,  and  had  a  part«r  in  this  ministry. 

(TS  (18)  He  purchased  a  field  with  the  wages  of  sin; 
and  he  fell  upon  his  face  on  the  ground,  and  burst 
in  the  middle,  and  all  his  entrails  were  poured  out. 

19  (19)  And  this  was  known  to  all  that  dwelt  at  Jeru- 
salem ;  so  that  the  field  was  called,  in  the  language 
of  the  country,  Aceldama,  *»  which  is  interpreted 

20  Field  of  Blood^  (20)  For  it  is  written,  in  the  book 
of  Psalms:  Ilet  his  habitation  be  desolate,  and 
let  no  resident  be  in  it;  and  let  another  take  his 

21  service.»  (21)  It  should  therefore  be,  that  one  of 
these  persons,  who  have  been  with  us  all  the  time 
that  our  Ix)rd  Jesus  went  in  and  out  with  us, 

22  (22)  commencing  from  the  baptism  of  John,  unto 
the  day  he  was  taken  up  from  us, — should   be, 

28  with  us,  a  witness  of  his  resurrection.  (23)  And 
they  proposed  two,  Joseph  called  Barsabas,  whose 

24  surname  was  Justus,  and  Matthias.  (24)  And  when 
theyJ^jLpraved,  they  said :  Thou,  Lord,  knowest 
what  IS  in  the  hearts  of  all,  manifest  which  thou 

25  hast  chosen  of  these  two,  (25)  that  he  should  take 

Jart*^  in  this  ministry  and  legateship,!  from  which 
udas  broke  away,  that  he  might  go  to  his  own 

26  place.  (26)  And  they  cast  lots,  and  it  came  upon 
Matthiaft;  and  he  was  numbered  with  the  eleven 
legates.'" 


213 


«  Gr.  a  sabbath     ^f 
dajfsjcummf     /jiptA 

•Sy. 


^a^rvi/fTtfei'^^ 


'  Sy.  JDjl 


»  or,  loL      I 


'  Sy- 


'Sy. 


ny/ 


^  or,  tot 

1  OTf  apotiUMkip. 


™  or,  Apostles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


214 


By.  U^i 

•  OT,  fire, 
'  Sy.  \^oy 


^Gr.  Mesopota- 
mia. 


Sjr.l 


,a-^ 


or,  middle  of 
Hue  forenoon. 


e  or,  Elders. 


6 


ACTS,    II. 

And  when  the  days  of  pentecost  were  fully  come,  IL 
while  they  were  au  assembled  together,  (2)  sud-    2 
denly  there  was  a  sound  from  heaven,  as  of  a 
violent  wind;»  and  the  whole  house  where  they 
were  sitting  was  filled  with  it    (3)  And  there  ap     3 
poared  to  them  tongues,  which  were  divided  like 
name;**  and  they  rested  upon  each  of  them.    (4J    4 
And  they  wjere  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,®  ana 
began  to  speak  in  diverse  languages,  as  the  Spirit 
gave  them  to  speak.    (5)  Now  there  were  resident    5 
at  Jerusalem  persons  wno  feared  Qod,  Jews  from 
all  the  nations  under  heaven.    (6)  And  when  that 
sound  occurred,  all  the  people  collected  together; 
and  they  were  agitated,  because  they  every  one 
heard  them  speaong  in  their  own  languages.    (7) 
And   they  were    {dl    astonished,   and  wondered^ 
saying  one  to  another:    All    these   who  speak, 
benold,  are  they  not  Qulileans?     (8)  And  how 
do  we  hear,  each  his  own  language,  m  which  we 
were  born?    (9^  Parthians,  and  Medes,  and  Elam- 
ites,  and  those  awellin^  between  the  rivers,^  Jews 
and  Cappadocians,  and  those  from  the  region  of 
Pontus  and  of  Asia,    (10)   and  those  ftt>m  the 
region  of  Phrygia,  and  of  Pamphylia,  and  of  Egypt, 
and  of  the  parts  of  Lybia  near  Oyrene,  and  those 
who  have  come  from  Kome,  Jews  and  proselytes ;« 
(11)  and  those  from  Crete,   and  Arabians. — ^Lo,  11 
we  hear  them  speak  in  our  own  languages  the 
wonders  of  God.    (12)  And  they  all  wondered  and  12 
were  astonished,  saving  one  to  another:   From 
whom  is  this  thingr    (13^  Others  however  ridi-  13 
culed  them,  saying:  They  nave  drunken  new  wine, 
and  are  intoxicated 

And  afterwards  Simon  Cephas  rose  up,  with  the  14 
eleven  legates,  and  elevated  his  voice,  and  said  to 
them :  Men,  Jews,  and  all  ye  that  reside  at  Jerusa- 
lem ;  be  this  known  to  you,  and  hearken  ye  to  my 
words.  (15)  For  these  are  not  intoxicated,  as  ye  15 
suppose:  for  lo,  it  is  yet  but  the  third  hour.^ 
(16)  But  this  is  what  was  spoken  by  Joel  the 
prophet:  (17)  It  shall  be  in  the  last  days,  saith 
&oa,  that  I  will  pour  my  Spirit  upon  all  flesh: 
and  your  sons  shaU  prophesy,  and  your  daughters: 
and  your  young  men  shall  see  visions,  and  your 
oldg  men  shall  dream  dreams..  (18)  And  upon 
my  servants  and  my  handmaids  will  I  pour  my 


8 


10 


16 
17 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    II. 


215 


Spirit^  in  those  days,  and  they  shall  prophesy. 

19  (19)  And  I  will  give  signs  in  heaven,  and  prodi< 
gies*>  on  earth,  blood,  and  fire,  and  vapor  of  smoke. 

20  (20)  And  the  sun  shall  be  turned  into  darkness, 
and  the  moon  into  blood,  before  that  great  and 

21  fearfulday  of  the  Lord  come.  (21)  And  it  shall  be, 
that  whoevgr  will  call  on  the  name  of  the  Lord^^ 

22  shall  live.i  f  (i{2)  Men,  soua  Of  lHrael,'h6af  yeTKese 
words:  Jesus  the  Kazarean,  a  man  made  manifest 
among  you  by  God,  by  those  deeds  of  power  and 
prodigies  which  God  wrought  among  you  by  his 

28  hand,  as  ye  yourselves  know;  (23)  nim,  beinff 
hereto  appointed^  by  the  prescience  and  the  good 
pleasure  of  Qt)d, — ye  have  delivered  into,  the  hands 
of  the  wicked;    and  have    crucified    and    dain. 

24  (24)  But  Gt>d  hath  resuscitated  him,  and  hath  loosed 
the  oordfli  of  the  grave ;  because  it  could  not  be, 
that  he  should  be  held  in  the  grave.  (25)  For 
David  said  of  him :  I  foresaw  my  Lord  at  all 
times ;  for  he  is  on  my  right  hand,  so  that  I  shall 
not  be  moved.  (26)  Therefore  my  heart  doth  re- 
joice, and  my  glory  exult,  and  also  my  body  shall 
abide  in  hope.  (27)  For  thou  wilt  not  leave  my 
soul  in  the  grave,  nor  wilt  thou  give  thy  pious  one 
to  see  corruption.  (28)  Thou  hast  revealed  to  me 
the  path  of  life;  thou  wilt  fill  me  with  joy  with 
thy  presence.  (29)  Men,  brethren,  I  may  speak  to 
you  explicitly  of  the  patriarch  David,  that  he  died, 
and  also  was  buried;  and  his  sepulchre  is  with 
us  to  this  day.  (30)  For  he  was  a  prophet,  and  he 
knew,  that  God  had  sworn  to  him  by  an  oath : 
Of  the  fruit  of  thy  bowels,  I  will  seat  [one]  on  thy 
throne.  (31)  And  he  foresaw,  and  spoke  of  the 
resurrection  of  Messiah,  that  he  was  not  left  in 
the  grave,  neither  did  his  body  see  corruption. 
(32)  This  Jesus  hath  God  resuscitated ;  and  we  all 
are  his  witnesses.  (33)  And  he  it  is,  who  is  ex- 
alted by  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  hath  received 
from  the  Father  a  promise  respecting  the  Holy 
Spirit,  and  hath  sent  this  gift  which,  lo,  ye  see  and 
hear.  (34)  For  David  hath  not  ascended  into 
heaven ;  because  he  himself  said  :  The  Lord  said  to 
my  Lord,  seat  thyself  at  my  right  hand,(35)  imtil 
I  shall  place  thy  enemies  a  footstool  to  thy  feet. 

36  (36)  Therefore,  let  all  the  house  of  Israel  know, 


25 


26 

27 
28 
29 


30 


31 


32 
33 


34 
35 


Sy. 


'   or,  be  saved. 


Sy.  Separated 


or,  pangs. 


'  Sy/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


216 


ACTS.   111. 


^  or,  be  saved. 


o  or,  persons. 
p  or,  Apostles. 
'  Sy. 

ss  Gr.  ivya^ 


assuredly,  that  God  hath  made  that  Jesus  whom  ye 
crucified,  to  be  Lord  and  Messiah. 

And  when  they  heard  these  things,  they  were  agi-  37 
tated  in  their  heart ;  and  they  said  to  Simon  and  to 
the  rest  of  the  legates :  Brethren,  what  shall  we  do  ? 
(88)  Simon  said  to  them:   Bepent,  and  be  bap-  88 
tized  every  one  of  you,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord 
Jesus,  for  the  remission  of  sins ;   so  that  ye  may 
receive  t|ie  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit.    (39)  For  the  89 
promise  is  to  you,  an^  to  your  children,  and  to  all 
those  afar  off  whom  God  will  call.     (40)  And  in  40 
many  other  words  he  testified  to  them,  and  en- 
treated of  them,  saying:  Live  ye"  from  this  per- 
verse generation. — (41)  And  some  of  them  readily  41 
received  his  discourse,   and  believed,   and  were 
baptized.     And  there  were  added,  on  that  day, 
about  three  thousand  souls.®     (42)  And  they  per-  42 
severed  in  the  doctrine  of  the  legates  ;P  and  were 
associated  together  in  prayer,  and  in  breaking  the 
eucharist.' — {43)   And  fear  was  on  every  mind:  43 
and  many  signs  and  prodigies  were  [wrought]  by 
the  hand  of  the  legates  in  Jerusalem.     (44)  And  44 
all  they  who  believed,  were  together ;   and  what- 
ever belonged  to  them,  was  of  the  community. 
^J  And  they  who  had  a  possession,  sold  it,  and  45 
divided  to  each  one  as  he  had  need.    (46)  And  46 
they  continued  daily  in  the  temple,  with  one  soul : 
ana  at  home,  they  broke  bread  and  took  food 
rejoicing,   and  in  the  simplicity  of  their  heart. 
(47)  And  they  praised  God,  and  had  favor  with  all  47 
the  people.    And  our  Lord  added  daily  to  the  as- 
sembly those  who  became  alive. 

And  it  occurred,  as  ^mon  Cephas  and  John  ILL 
went  together  up  to  the  temple,  at  the  time  of 
prayer,  being  the  ninth  hour,  (2)  that,  lo,  those    2 
accustomed  to  bring  a  man  lame  from  his  mother's 
womb,  brought  him  and  laid  him  at  the  gate  of  the 
temple  called  Beautiful;  that  he  might  ask  alms 
of  those  going  into  the  temple.    (3)  This  man,     3 
when  he  saw  Simon  and  John  going  into  the  tem- 
ple, asked  them  to  give  him  alms.    (4)  And  Simon    4 
and  John  looked  on  him,  and  said  to  him :  Look 
on  us.    (5)  And  he  looked  on  them,  expecting  to    5 
receive  something  from  them.    (6)  Simon  said  to     6 
I  him :  Gold  and  suver,  I  have  not ;  out  what  I  have, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   IIL 


217 


I  give  to  thee;   in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 

7  Messiah,  the  Nazarean,  rise  up  and  walk.  (7)  And 
he  took  him  by  the  right  hand,  and  raised  him 
up:  and  forthwith,  his  feet  and  his  heels  recov- 

8  ered  strength.  (8)  And  he  sprang,  stood  up,  and 
walked :  and  he  entered  with  them  into  the  temple, 

9  walking,  and  leaping,  and  praising  God.  (9)  And  all 
the  people  saw  him,  as  he  walked  and  praised  God. 

10  (10)  And  they  knew  that  he  was  the  beggar,  who 
sat  daily  and  asked  alms,  at  the  gate  callea  Beauti- 
ful: and  they  were  filled  with  wonder  and  admira- 
tion at  what  had  occurred. 

11  And  as  he  held  fast  to  Simon  and  John,  all  the 
people  admiring  ran  to  them  at  the  portico  called 

12  Solomon's.  (12)  And  when  Simon  saw  [it],  he 
answered  and  said  to  them :  Men,  sons  of  Israel, 
why  do  ye  wonder  at  this  ?  or  why  do  ye  gaze  on 
us,  as  if  by  our  own  power  or  authonty  we  had 

18  made  this  man  to  walk  ?  (18)  The  God  of  Abra- 
ham and  of  Isaac  and  of  Jacob,  the  God  of  our 
fathers,  hath  glorified  his  Son  Jesus;  whom  ye 
delivered  up,  and  denied  in  the  presence  of  Pilate, 
when  he  would  have  justified  him  and  set  him  free. 

14  (14)  But  ye  denied  the  holy  and  just  One,  and  de- 
manded that  a  murderer  should  be  released  to  you. 

15  (15)  And  that  Prince  of  life*  ye  slew ;  and  him, 
hath  God  raised  from  the  dead,  and  all  of  us  are 

16  witnesses  of  it.*>  (16)  And,  by  the  faith  in  his 
name,  he  hath  strengthened  and  cored  this  man, 
whom  ye  see  and  know ;  and  faith  in  him  hath 
given  the  man  this  soundness  before    you  all. 

17  (17)  And  now,  my  brethren,  I  know  that  through 
misapprehensions  ye  did  this,  as  did  also  your 

18  chiera  :^  (18)  and  God,  according  as  he  had  pre- 
viously announced  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  prophets 
that  the  Messiah  would  suffer,  hath  in  this  manner 

19  fulfilled  [it].  (19)  Eepent,  therefore,  and  be  con- 
verted;  that  so  your  sins  may  be  blotted  out, 

20  (20)  and  times  of  rest  may  come  to  you  from  before 
the  face  of  the  Lord ;  and  he  may  send  to  you  him, 
who  was  made  ready  for  you,  Jesus  the  Messiah : 

21  (21)  whom  the  heavens  must  retain,^  until  the 
completion  of  the  times  of  those  things,  which  God 
hath  spoken  by  the  mouth  of  his  holy  prophets  of 

22  oli  (22)  For  Moses  said :  A  prophet,  like  me, 
will  tne  Lord  raise  up  i/)  you,  from  among  ycur 


Sy. 

^  or,  hh  mt- 
nesseM. 


Sy. 


d  or,  receive. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


218 

»Sy.]jOAaJ=s 
6r.  Ao^^xT). 


Sj.  )jao5} 


Sy.  ^QiD5l 


'  or,  redemption, 
or,  ^  savof. 


ACTS,    IV. 

brethren ;  to  him  hearken  ^e,  in  all  that  he  shall 
sav  to  jou.     (23)  And  it  will  be,  that  every  soul®  23 
who  will  not  hearken  to  that  prophet,  that  soul 
shall  perish^  from  his  people.     (24)  And  all  the  24 
prophets  that  have  been,  gym  Samuel  and  those 
after  him,  have  spoken  and  proclaimed  of  these 
daj&    (25)  Ye  are  the  children  of  the  prophets :  26 
and  that  covenants  which  God  made  with  our 
&thers, — when  he  said  to  Abraham,  that  in  thy  seed 
shall  all  the  &milies  of  the  earth  be  blessed, — 
(26)  he  hath  first  established  to  you :  and  God  26 
hath  sent  his  Son  to  bless  jrou,  if  ye  will  be  con- 
verted, and  repent  of  your  wickedness. 

And  while  thej^  we^re  speaking  these  words  to  lY. 
the  people,  the  priests  and  the  &idducees  and  the 
rulers^  of  the  temple  rose  up  against  them;  (2)    2 
being  angry  with  them,  that  they  tatigt^t  the  peo- 
ple, and  preached  a  resurrection  from  the  deaa  by 
the  Messiah.    (3)  And  they  laid  hands  on  them,    3 
and  kept  them  until  the  next  dav  ^  because  even- 
ing was  drawing  near.    (4)  Ana  many  who  had    4 
heard  the  word,  believed;  and  they  were,  in  num- 
ber, about  five  thousand  men. — (5)  And  the  next    5 
day,  the  rulers  and  the  Elders  and  the  Scribes 
assembled;  (6)  and  also  Annas  the  high  priest,     6 
and  Oaiaphas,  and  John,  and  Alexander,  and  they 
who  were  of  the  kindred  of  the  high  priests. 
(7)  And  when  they  had  set  them  in  the  midst,     7 
they    interrogated   them:    By  what  power**    or 
what  name,  mive  ye  done  this?— (8)  Then  Simon    8 
Cephas  was  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit^  and  said  to 
them:  Ye  rulers ^  of  the  people,  and  Elders  of  the 
house  of  Israel,  hear  ye.    (9)  If  we  are  judged  by    9 
you  this  day,  respecting  the  good  deed  done  to  the 
infirm  man,  by  what  means  he  was  healed ;  (10)  be  10 
it  known  to  you,  and  to  all  the  people  of  Israel, 
that  by  the  name  of  Jesus  Messiah  tne  Nazarean, 
whom  ye  crucified,  and  whom  God  hath  raised 
firom  the  dead,  lo,  by  him,  doth  this  [man]  stand 
here  before  you  recovered.     (11)  This  is  the  stone,  11 
which  ye  builders  rejected ;  and  it  hath  become  the 
head  of  the  corner.     (12^    Neither  is  there  deliv-  12 
erance^  in  any  other;  tor  there  is  not  another 
name  under  heaven,  which  is  given  to  men,  where- 
by to  live.® — (13)  And  when  they  heard  the  speech  13 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    IV. 


219 


rat. 


of  Simon  and  John,  which  they  pronounced  confi- 
dently, they  reflected  that  these  were  unlearned  and  '  Sy.  V^GLi)cr 
plebeian^  men;  and  they  were  surprised  at  them,     —  Gr.  Wii- 
and  recognized  them  as  having  been  conversant 

14  with  Jesus.  (14)  And  they  saw  that  the  lame 
man,  who  had  been  healed,  stood  near  them ;  and 

15  they  could  say  nothing  to  confront  them.  (15) 
Then  they  commanded  to  remove  them  from  the 
presence  of  the  council ;  and  said  one  to  another : 

16  (16)  What  shall  we  do  to  these  men?  For  lo,  that 
a  manifest  sign  hath  been  wrought  by  them,  is 
known  to  all  that  reside  at  Jerusalem,  and  we  can- 

17  not  deny  it.  (17)  But  that  the  fame  of  it  spread 
no  furtner,  let  us  interdict  their  speakinff  any 

18  more  to  any  man  in  this  name.  (18)  And  they 
called  them,  and  commanded  them  not  to  speak 

19  nor  to  teach  at  all  in  the  name  of  Jesus.  (19)  Si- 
mon Cephas  and  John  answered,  and  said  to  them: 
Whether  it  be  right  before  God,  that  we  hearken 

20  to  you  more  than  to  God,  judge  ye.  (20)  For  we 
cannot  but  speak  that  which  we  have  seen  and 

21  heard.  (21)  And  they  threatened  them,  and  dis- 
missed them.  For  they  found  no  ground  for  pun- 
ishing them,  because  of  the  people :  for  every  one 

22  praised  God  for  what  had  been  done ;  (22)  for  the 
man,  on  whom  this  sign  of  healing  had  been 
wrought,  was  more  than  forty  years  old.8r 

28  And  when  they  were  dismissed,  they  went  to 
their  brethren,  and  told  them  all  that  the  priests 

24  and  Elders  had  said.  (24)  And  they,  when  they 
heard  [it],  unitedly  lifted  up  their  voice  to  Goo, 
and  said:  Lord,  thou  art  (Jod,  who  hast  made 
heaven,  and  earthy  and  seas,  and  every  thing  in 

25  them.  (25)  And  it  is  thou  who  hast  said,  by  the 
Holy  Spirit  in  the  mouth  of  David  thy  servant : 
Why  do  the  nations  rage,  and  the  people  imagine 

26  a  vain  thing?  (26)  The  kings  of  the  earth  and 
the  potentates  stood  up,  and  they  consulted  to- 
gether, against  the  Lord,  and  against  his  anoint- 

27  ed.**    (27)  For,  in  reality,  against  thy  holy  Son 
Jesus  whom  thou  hast  anointed,*  Herod  and  Pi- 
late, with  the  Gentiles  and  the  congregation  of  •  Sy.  Ai..  ^vr 
Israel,  have  been  combined  together  in  this  city, 

28  (28)  to  do  whatever  thy  hand  and  thy  pleasure 

29  previously  marked  out  to  be  done.  (29)  And 
also   now,  Lord,  behold  and  see  their  menaces: 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


'  Sj,  8onqf 
mare  than  40 
years. 


^Sy. 
his  Messiah. 


220 


•Sy, 
bSy.li 


Sy.  -5"^^ 


ACTS,   V. 

aad  grant  to  thy  servants,  that  they  may,  proclaim 
thy  word  boldly,  (30)  while  thou  extendest  thy  30 
hand  for  cures  and  prodigies,  to  be  done  in  the 
name  of  thy  holy  Son  Jesus. — (31)  And  when  81 
they  had  prayed  and  made  supplications,  the  place 
in  which  they  were  assembled  was  shaken;  and 
they  were  all  filled  with  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  spoke 
the  word  of  God  boldly. 

And  in  the  assembly  of  the  persons  that  be-  82 
lieved.  there  was  one  soul,  and  one  mind :  and  no 
one  of 'them  said,  of  the  property  he  possessed,  that 
it  was  his  own ;  but  whatever  was  theirs,  it  was  the 
community's.     (33)  And  with  great  power,^  the  33 
legates  testified  to  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  Mes- 
siah: and  great  grace  *  was  with  them  all.    (34)  84 
And  no  one  among  them  was  destitute ;  for  those 
who  possessed  lands  or  houses,  sold,  and  brought 
the  price  of  what  was  sold,  (35)  and  placed  [it]  at  35 
the  feet  of  the  legates ;  and  distribution  was  made 
to  every  one,  as  he  had  need.    (36)  And  Joseph,  86 
who  by  the  legates  was  surnamed  Barnabas,  (which 
is  interpreted  Son  of  Consolation,)  a  Levite  of  the 
country  of  Cyprus,  (37)  had  a  field:  and  he  sold  87 
it,  and  brought  the  price  of  it,  and  laid  [it]  before 
the  feet  of  the  legates. 

And  a  certain  man  whose  name  was  Ananias,»  V. 
with  his  wife  whose  name  was  Sapphira,**  sold  his 
field,  (2)  and  carried  away  [part]  of  the  price  and    2 
concealed  it,  his  wife  consenting;  and  he  brought 
[a  part]  of  the  money,  and  laid  [it]  before  the  feet 
of  the  legates.     (3)  And  Simon  said  to  him :  Ana-    3 
nias,  why  hath  Satan  so  filled  thy  heart,  that  thou 
shouldst  lie  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  conceal  of 
the  money  of  the  price  of  the  field  ?    (4J  Was  it    4 
not  thine  own  before  it  was  sold  ?     And  wnen  sold, 
again  thou  hadst  authority^  over  the  price  of  it. 
Why  hast  thou  set  thy  heart  to  do  this  purpose? 
Thou  hast  not  lied  against  men,  but  agamst  Qt>d. 
(5)  And  when  Ananias  heard  these  words,  he  fell    5 
down,  and  died.     And  great  fear  was  upon  all 
them  that  heard  [of  it].    (6)  And  the  young  men     6 
among  them  arose,  and  gathered  him  up,  and  car- 
ried [him]  out,  and  buried  him. — (7)  And  when    7 
three  hours  had  passed,  his  wife  also  came  in, 
without  knowing  what  had  occurred.     (8)  Simon     8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   V. 

said  to  her:  Tell  me,  if  je  sold  the  field  for  this 
9  price ?^  And  she  said:  Yes,  for  this  price.  (9) 
Simon  said  to  her:  Since  ye  have  been  equals  in 
tempting  the  Spirit  of  the  Ix)rd,  lo,  the  feet  of  the 
buners  of  thy  husband  are  at  the  door,  and  they 

10  will  carry  thee  out.  (10)  And  immemately  she 
fell  before  their  feet,  and  died.  And  those  young 
men  came  in,  and  found  her  dead;  and  they  took 
up,  carried  forth,  and  buried  her  by  the  side  of  her 

11  husband. — (11)  And  great  fear  was  on  all  the  as- 
^  sembly,<^  and  on  all  them  that  heard  [it]. 

12  And  there  were  many  signs  and  prodigies 
wrought  by  the  legates  among  the  people.  And 
they  were  all  assembled  together  in  the  porch  of 

18  Solomon.  (18)  And  of  the  others,  no  one  ventured 
to  come  near  them;    but  the  people  magnified 

14  them.  (14)  And  the  more  were  those  added  who 
feared  the  Lord,  a  multitude  both  of  men  and  of 

16  women.  (16)  So  that  they  brought  out  into  the 
streets  the  sick,  laid  on  beds,  that  when  Simon 
should  pass,  at  least  his  shadow  might  cover  them. 

16  (16)  And  many  came  to  them  from  other  cities 
around  Jerusalein,  bringing  the  sick  and  those  who 
had  unclean  spirits ;  and  thev  were  all  cured. 

17  And  the  high  priest  was  nlled  with  indication, 
and  all  those  with  him  who  were  of  the  (K)ctrine^ 

18  of  the  Sadducees.  (18)  And  thev  laid  hands  on  the 
legates,   and   took   and   bouna  them  in    prison. 

19  (19)  Then  the  angel  of  the  Lord,  by  night,  opened 
the  door  of  the  nrison,  and  let  them  out ;  aud  said 

20  to  them :  (20)  do,  stand  in  the  temple,  and  speak 

21  to  the  people  all  these  words  of  life.  (21)  And  in 
the  morning,  they  went  and  entered  into  the  tem- 
ple, and  taught.  And  the  high  priest  and  those 
with  him,  convoked  their  associates  and  the  Elders 
of  Israel,  and  sent  to  the  prison  to  bring  forth  the 

22  legates.  (22)  And  when  those  sent  by  them  went, 
they  found  them  not  in  the  prison ;  and  they  re- 

23  turned  and  came  back,  (23)  and  said :  We  found 
the  prison  carefully  closed,  and  also  the  keepers 
standing  before  the  doors;    and  we  opened,  but 

24  found  no  one  there.  (24)  And  when  the  chief 
priests  and  rulers  of  the  temple  heard  these  words, 
they  were  astonished  at  them ;  and  they  studied 

25  what  this  could  mean.  (25)  And  one  came  and 
informed  them :  Those  men,  whom  ye  shut  up  in 


(he  church 


221 


*  Sj.theHfru 
ces. 


or,  i 


Digitized  by 


Google 


222 


prtnce  and 
Savumr, 

iSj.  wards. 


Sy. 


By.]}oL 


^  Bj.be. 

'  Sy.  iif  eameth 

not  to  your 

hand. 


ACTS,   V. 

the  prison,  lo,  they  are  standing  in  the  temple,  and 
teacning  the  people. — (26)  Then  went  the  rulers  26 
with  attendants,  to  bring  them  without  violence ; 
for  they  feared,  lest  the  people  should  stone  them. 
(27)  And  when   they  had  brought  them,   they  27 

E laced  them  before  the  whole  council;   and  the 
i^h  priest  began  to  say  to  them :  (28)  Did  we  not  28 
strictly  charge  you,  to  teach  no  person  in  this 
namer     And  behold,  ye  have  filled  Jerusalem 
with  your  doctrine  \9  and  ye  would  bring  the  blood 
of  this  man  upon  us. — (29)  And  Simon,  with  the  29 
legates,  answered  and  said  to  them :  God  is  to  be 
ol^yed,  rather  than  men.    (30)   The  God  of  our  30 
fathers  hath  raised  up  that  Jesus,  whom  ye  slew 
when  ye  hanged  him  on  a  tree.    (81)  Him  hath  31 
God  established  as  a  head  and  vivifier  *^  and  hath 
exalted  him  to  his  own  right  hand,  so  that  he 
might  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins  to 
Israel.    (32)  And  we  are  the  witnesses  of  these  32 
things;*   and  also  the   Holy  Spirit,   whom  God 
giveth  to  them  that  believe  in  him. — (83)   And  88 
when  they  heard  these  things,  they  burned  with 
indignation,  and  thought  of  putting  them  to  death. 
(34)  Then  rose  up  one  of  the  Pharisees  whose  name  84 
was  Gamaliel,  k  a  teacher  of  the  law,  and  honored  by 
all  the  people ;  and  he  directed  them  to  put  the 

_  ites  aside  for  a  short  time.    (86)  And  he  said  85 
to  them :  Men,  sons  of  Israel,  take  heed  to  your- 
selves, and  consider  what  ye  ought  to  do  in  regard 
to  these  men.    (86)  For  before  this  time,  rose  up  86 
Theudas,!  and  said  of  himself  that  he  was  some 
great  one ;  and  there  went  after  him  about  four 
hundred  men.     And  he  was  slain ;  and  they  who 
went  after  him,  were  dispersed  and  became  as 
nothing.    (87)  And  after  him,  rose  up  Judas  a  87 
Galilean,  in  the  days  when  the  people  were  enrolled 
for  the   capitation   tax;   and   he  seduced  much 
people  after  him.     And  he  died,  and  all  they  that 
went  after  him  were  dispersed.    (88)  And  now,  I  88 
say  to  you :  Desist  from  these  men,  and  let  thepa 
alone.    For  if  this  device  and  this  work  originate™ 
from  men,  they  will  dissolve  and  come  to  nothing. 
(89]  But  is  it  be  from  God,  it  is  not  in  your  power'*  89 
to  mistrate  it :  that  ye  may  not  be  found  placing 
yourselves  in  opposition  to  God. — And  they  as- 
sented to  him.    (40)  And  they  called  the  legates,  40 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    VL 


223 


and  scourged  them,  and  commanded  them  not  to 
teach  in*  the  name  of  Jesus,  and  dismissed  them. 

41  (41)  And  they  went  from  before  them,  rejoicing 
that  the  J  were  worthy  to  suffer  abuse  on  account 

42  of  that  name.  (42^  And  they  ceased  not  to  teach 
daily,  in  the  temple  and  at  home,  and  to  preach 
concerning  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

VL  And  in  those  days,  when  the  disciples  had  be- 
come numeroujB,  the  Grecian  disciples  murmured 
against  the  Hebrew,  because  their  widows  were 
neglected  in  the  daily  ministration*  [to  the  needy]. 

2  (2)  And  the  twelye  legates  conyoKca  tne  whole 
company  of  the  disciples,  and  said  to  them :  It  is 
not  proper,**  that  we  should  neglect  the  word  of 

8  God,  and  sgrye  tables.  (8)  Therefore  brethren, 
search  out,  and  elect  firom  among  you,  seyen  men 
of  whom  there  is  good  testimony,  men  fell  of  the 
Spirit'  of  the  Lord,  and  of  wisdom ;  that  we  may 

4  place  them  oyer  this  business:  (4)  and  we  will 
continue  in  prayer,  and  in  th^  a^niatrfttinn  of  the 
word^  (5)  And  this  proposal*^  was  acceptSBIe  TJe- 
tbre  ill  the  people.  And  they  elected  Stephen,  a 
man  who  was  full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spirit; 
and  Philip,  and  Prochorus,  and  Nicanor,  and 
Timon,  and  Parmenas,  and  Nicolas  an  Antiochian 

6  proselyte.^  (6)  These  stood  before  the  legates ; 
and  wnen  they  had  prayed,  the7  laid  the  hand  on 

7  them. — (7)  And  the  word  of  Giod  increased,  and 
the  number  of  disciples  was  enlarged  at  Jerusalem 
greatly;  and  many  people  from  among  the  Jews, 
were  obedient  to  the  faith. 

8  And  Stephen  was  full  of  grace  and  energy ;« 
and  he  wrought  signs  and  prodigies  among  the 

9  people.  ^9)  And  there  rose  up  some  of  the  syna- 
gogue whicn  is  called  that  of  the  freed  men,  Clyre- 
nians,  and  Alexandrians,  and  persons  from  Cilicia 
and  from  Asia ;  and  they  disputed  with  Stephen. 

10  (10)  And  they  coidd  not  withstand  the  wisdom  and 

11  the  Spirit  that  spoke  by  him.  (11)  Then  they 
sent  men,  and  instructed  them  to  say:  We  haye 
heard  him   speak  words  of   blasphemy,   against 

12  Moses  and  against  Ood.  (12)  And  they  excited 
the  people,  and  the  Elders,  and  the  Scribes;  and 
they  came,  and  rose  upon  him,  and  seized  him,  and 

18  carried  him  into  the  midst  of  the  council.   (18)  And 


Sy. 


Sy.  leord. 


*  Sy.  ISO*^ 


Sy.U 


Digitized  by 


Google 


224 


ACTS,   VII. 


^  or,  tn  MesopO" 
iamia. 


'■  Sy.  lo^? 


87.  in^} 


they  set  up  felse  witnesses,  who  said  r  This  man 
ceaseth  not  to  utter  words  contrary*  to  the  law,  and 
against  this  holy  place.     (14)  For  we  have  heard  14 
him  say,  that  this  Jesus  the  Nazarean  will  destroy 
this  place,  and  will  change  the  rites  which  Moses 
delivered  to  you.    (16)  And  all  they  who  were  15 
sitting   in   the   council   looked    upon    him,    and 
they  beheld  his  face,  as  the  fiace  of  an  angel. — 
(Vn.)  And  the  high  priest  asked  him :  Are  these  YLL 
things  so  ?    (2)   And  he  said :  Men,  brethren,  and     2 
our  fitthers,  hear  ye.     The  God  of  glory  appeared 
to  our  father  Abraham,  when  he  was  iJetween  the 
rivers,*    before   he   came  to  reside  in  Charran; 
(8)  and  he  said  to  him:  Depart  from  thy  country,     .3 
and  from  thy  kindred,  and  go  to  a  land  which  I 
will  show  to  thee.     (4)  And  then  Abraham  de-     4 
parted  from  the  land  of  the  Chaldeans,  and  came 
and  dwelt  in  Charran.**     And  from  there,  after  his 
father  had  died,  God  removed  him  to  this  land,  in 
which  ye  this  day  dwell.    (5)  And  he  did  not  give     5 
him  an  inheritance  in  it,  not  even  a  foot-track :  but 
he  promised  that  he  would  give  it  him,  as  an  inher- 
itance to  him  and  to  his  seed,  when  as  yet  he  had 
no  son.     (6)  And  God  conversed  with  him,  and     6 
said  to  him :  Thy  seed  will  be  a  sojourner  in  a 
foreign  land ;  and  they  will  reduce  it  to  servitude, 
and  will  treat  it  ill,  during  four  hundrfed  years. 

(7)  And  the  nation,  to  whom  they  perform  bond-     7 
service,  I  will  judge,  saith  God.     And  aflierwards, 
they  will  go  out,  and  will  worship  me  in  this  land. 

(8)  And  he  gave  them  the  covenant®  of  circumci-     8 
sion.     And  then  he  begat  Isaac,  and  circumcised 
him  the  eighth  day.     And  Isaac  begat  Jacob :  and 
Jacob  begat  our  twelve  fathers. — {9)   And  those     9 
our    fathers  envied   Joseph,  and  sold  him  into 
Egypt:  but  God  was  with  him,  (10)  and  delivered  10 
him  from  all  his  aflBictions ;  and  gave  him  favor  and 
wisdom  before  Pharaoh,  king  of  Egypt,  and  he 
made  him  chiefs  over  Egypt,  and  over  all  his  house. 
(11)  And  there  was  a  famine  and  great  distress  in  11 
all  Egypt,  and  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  and  our 
fathers  lacked  food.     (12)  And  when  Jacob  heard  12 
that  there  was  bread-stuff  in  Egypt,  he  sent  our 
fathers  a  first  time.     (13)  And  when  they  went  the  IS 
second  time,  Joseph  made  himself  known  to  his 
brethren ;  and  the  kindred  of  Joseph  was  known 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   VII. 


226 


14 


16 

16 


17 


23 
24 


26 


26 


to  Pharaoh.  (14)  And  Joseph  sent  and  brought 
his  father  Jacob,  and  all  his  family ;  and  they  were 
in  number  seventy;  and  five  souls.®  (16^  And 
Jacob  went  down  into  Egypt ;  and  he  diea  there, 
he  and  our  fathers.  (16)  And  he  was  transported 
to  Sychem,  and  was  deposited  in  the  sepulchre 
which  Abraham  bought  with  money  of  the  sons  of 
Emmor. — ^17)  And  when  the  time  arrived  for  that 
which  Goa  had  promised  to  Abraham  with  an 
path,  the  people  had  multiplied  and  become  strong, 

18  in  Egypt :  (18)  until  there  arose  another  king  over 

19  Egypt,  who  knew  not  Joseph.  (19)  And  he  dealt 
craftily  with  our  kindred,  and  ill-treated  our  fathers, 
and  gave  orders  that  their  infants  should  be  cast 

20  away,  and  should  not  live. — (20)  At  that  time  was 
Moses  bom ;  and  he  was  lovely  to  God  :^  and  he 
was  nursed  three  months  in   his  father's  house, 

21  (21)  And  when  he  was  cast  out,  by  his  people,  the 
dauffhter  of  Pharaoh  found  him,  and  brought  him 

22  up  ror  her  own  son.  (22)  And  Moses  was  instructed 
in  all  the  vrisdom  of  the  Egyptians ;  and  he  was 
eminent?  in  his  words,  ana  also  in  his  deeds. 
(23)  And  when  he  was  forty  years  old,  it  came 
into  his  heart  to  visit  his  brethren,  the  children  of 
Israel  (24)  And  he  saw  one  of  the  race^  of  his 
kindred  treated  with  violence;  and  he  avenged 
him,  and  did  him  justice,  and  killed  the  Egyptian 
who  had  abused  him.  (25)  And  he  supposed 
that  his  brethren  the  sons  of  Israel  would  have  un- 
derstood, that  by  his  hand  God  would  give  them 
deliverance ;  but  they  understood  not.  (26)  And 
on  another  day,  he  appeared  to  them,  as  they  were 
quarrelling  one  with  another.  And  he  exhorted 
^hem  to  become  reconciled,  saying:  Men,  ye  are 
brethren;   why  do  ye  seek  to  harm  each  other? 

27  (27)  But  he  who  did  the  wrong  to  his  fellow,  re- 
pulsed him  from  him,  and  said  to  him :  Who  con- 

28  stituted  thee  a  ruler  and  a  judge  over  us?  (28)  Dost 
thou  seek  to  kill  me,  as  thou  killedst  the  Egyptian 

29  yesterday?  (29)  And  Moses  fled  at  that  speech, 
and  became  a  sojourner  in  the  land  of  Midian.^ 

80  And  he  had  two  sons. — (80)  And  when  forty  years 
had  been  passed  by  him*^  there,  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  the  wilderness  of  mount 

81  Sinai,  in  a  fire  that  burned  in  a  bush.  (81)  And 
when  Moses  saw  [it],  he  admired  the  sight:  and  as 


•  or,  persons. 


or,  very  lovely 


»  Sy.  ^^Ai 


^  Sy.  sofiff. 


'  Sy-  ^^ 

^  Sy.  werefuU 
to  him. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   VIL 


Sy«  tn  a  voice. 


n»  Sy.  I  seeing 
have  seen. 


'Sy. 
Sy.^J 


85 


86 


87 


he  drew  near  to  behold  fit],  the  Lord  said  to  him, 
audibly  r*  (32)  I  am  the  God  of  thy  fathers,  the  God  82 
of  Abraham,  and  of  Isaac,  and  of  Jacob.  And 
Moses  trembled,  and  dared  not  to  gaze  at  the  sight. 
'88)  And  the  Lord  said  to  him:  Loose  thy  shoes  83 
Tom  thy  feet;  for  the  ground  on  which  thou  stand- 
est  is  holy.  (34)  I  have  attentively  seen"*  the  afiBic-  84 
tion  of  mj  people,  who  are  in  Egypt ;  and  I  have 
heard  their  groans,  and  have  come  down  to  deliver 
them.  And  now,  come,  I  will  send  thee  to  Egypt. 
— (36)  This  Moses,  whom  they  rejected,  saying. 
Who  constituted  thee  a  ruler  and  judge  over  us  r 
this  same  did  God,  by  the  hand  of  the  angel  that 
appeared  to  him  in  tne  bush,  send  to  them  to  be 
their  captain  and  deliverer.  (36)  He  it  Was  that 
brought  them  out,  working  signs  and  wonders  and 
prodigies  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  and  at  the  sea  of 
rushes,  and  in  the  desert,  forty  years. — (37)  This 
Moses  is  the  man  who  said  to  the  children  of  Israel: 
A  prophet,  like  me,  will  the  Lord  God  raise  up 
to  you  from  among  your  brethren;  to  him  give 
ear.  (88)  He  it  was,  who  was  in  the  congregation  38 
in  the  wilderness,  with  the  angel  that  conversed 
with  him  and  with  our  fathers  at  mount  Sinai; 
and  he  it  was,  received  the  living  words  to  give 
[them]  to  us.  (39)  And  our  fathers  would  not 
hearken  to  him,  but  forsook  him,  and  in  their 
hearts  returned  again  to  Egypt;  (40)  when 
they  said  to  Aaron :  Make  us  gods  who  may  go 
before  us ;  because,  as  for  this  Moses  who  brought 
us  from  the  land  of  Egypt,  we  know  not  what  hath 
become  of  him.  (41)  And  he  made  them  a  calf  in 
those  days ;  and  they  offered  sacrifices  to  idols,  and 
were  voluptuous  with  the  work  of  their  hands. 
(42)  And  God  turned  away,  and  gave  them  up  to  42 
worship  the  hosts  of  heaven :  as  it  is  written  in  the 
book  of  the  prophets:  Did  ye,  for  forty  years,  in 
the  wilderness,  present  to  me  a  slain  animal  or  a 
sacrifice,  ye  sons  of  Israel?  (43)  But  ye  bore  the  43 
tabernacle  of  Malchum,^  and  the  star  of  the  god 
Ilephon,o  images  which  ye  had  made,  that  ye 
might  bow  down  to  them.  I  will  transport  you 
beyond  Babylon. — (44)  Lo,  the  tabernacle  of  the 
testimony  of  our  fathers,  was  in  the  wilderness ;  as 
he  who  talked  with  Moses,  commanded  to  make  it 
after  the  form  which  he  showed  him.     (46)  And 


89 
40 


41 


44 


46 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   VIII. 


227 


thia  same  tabernacle,  our  fathiers,  with  Joshua, 
actually  brought  into  the  land  which  God  gave  to 
them  for  an  inheritance  from  those  nations  which  he 
drove  out  before  them ;  and  it  was  borne  about, 

46  imtil  the  days -of  David,  (46)  He  found  favor 
before  God;  and  he  requested,  that  he  might  find 

47  a  residence  for  the  God  of  Jacob.    (47)  But  Solo- 

48  mon  built  the  house.  (48)  Yet  the  most  High 
lodgeth  not  in  a  work  of  [human]  hands ;  as  saith 

49  the  prophet :  (49)  Heaven  is  my  throne,  and  earth 
the  footstool  under  my  feet  What  is  the  house, 
ye  will  build  for  me  ?  saith  the  Lord :  or,  what  is 

50  the  place  of  my  repose  ?    (50)  Lo,  hath  not  my 
61  hand  made  all  these  things? — (51)  0  ye  stiff  of 

neck,  and  uncircumcised  in  their  heart,  and  in  their 
hearing ;  ye  do  always  set  yourselves  against  the 

52  Holy  Spirit ;  as  your  fathers,  so  also  ye.  (52)  For, 
which  of  the  prophets  did  not  your  fathers  perse- 
cute and  kill,  [even]  them,  who  foretold  the  cominff 
of  the  Just  One,  whom  ye  delivered  up  and  slew? 

58  (58)  And  ye  have  received  the  law  by  the  ordina- 
-  tionP  of  angels,  and  have  not  kept  it. 

54  And  when  they  heard  these  things,  they  were 
filled  with  rage  in  their  souls ;  and  they  gnashed 

65  their  teeth  against  him.  (55)  And  he,  as  he  was 
full  of  faith  and  of  the  Holy  Spint,  looked  towards 
heaven,  and  saw  tlfe  glory  of  God,  and  Jesus  stand- 

66  ing  at  the  right  hand  of  God.  (56)  And  he  said : 
Lo,  I  see  heaven  open,  and  the  Son  of  man  standing 

67  on  the  right  hand  of  God.  (57)  And  they  criea 
out  with  a  lo\id  voice,  and  stopped  their  ears,  and 

68  all  rushed  upon  him.  (58)  And  they  seized  him, 
and  hurried  nira  out  of  the  city,  and  stoned  him. 
And  they  who  testified  against  him,  laid  their 
clothes  at  the  feet  of  a  certain  young  man  who  was 

69  called  Saul.  (59)  And  they  stoned  Stephen,  while 
he  prayed  and  said :  Our  Lord  Jesus,  receive  my 

60  spirit.  (60)  And  when  he  had  kneeled  down, 
he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  Our  Lord, 
establish  not  this  sin  against  them.     And  when  he 

Vnthad  said  this,  he  fell  asleep.'  (VIH.).  ^^^  Saul 
was  consenting  and  participating  in  his  death. — 
And  there  was,  in  that  day,  a  great  persecution 
against  the  church*  that  was  at  Jerusalem;  and 
they  were  all  dispersed,  except  the  legates,  among 
the  villages  of  Judaea  and  likewise  among  the  Sa- 


Sy.  ]^^DaZ 
sz  precept. 


Sy.  ^0!i«=- 
he  laid  him$elj 
down. 


'Sy.l2^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


228 


ACTS,   VIII. 


or,  loord. 


Sy. 


•Q^1a£0 


dSj.)lt^ 


Sy. 


^OllO* 


fSy. 

lifeSo. 


maritans.    (2)  And  believing  men  gathered  up  and    2 
buried  Stephen.     And  they  lamented  over  him 
greatly.    (3)  And  Saul  persecuted  the  church  of     8 
&od,  entering  houses,  and  dragging  forth  men  and 
women  and  committing  them  to  prison. 

And  they  who  were  dispersed,  travelled  about,    4 
and  preached  the  word  of  God.     (5)  And  Philip    5 
went  down  to  a  city  of  the  Samaritans,  and  preached 
concerning  the  Messiah.    (6)  And  when  the  people    6 
who  were  there  heard  "his  discourse,**  they  gave  ear 
to  him,  and  acquiesced  in  all  that  he  said ;  l)ecause 
they  saw  the  signs  which  he  wrought.     (7)  For    7 
many  who  were  possessed  by  unclean  spirits,  cried 
with  a  loud  voice,  and  came  out  of  them:  and 
others,  who  were  paralytic  and  lame,  were  healed. 
(8)  And  there  was  great  joy  in  that  city. — (9)  And    8 
there  was  a  certain  man  there,  whose  name  was    9 
Simon,*  who  had  resided  in  that  city  a  long  time, 
and  who  seduced  the  people  of  the  Samaritans  by 
his  sorceries,  magnifying  himself,  and  saying,  I  am 
a  great  personage.     (10)   And  they  all  inclined 
towards  him,  great  and  small ;  and  they  said,  This 
is  the  mighty  power<^  of  God.     (11)  And  they  ac- 
quiesced in  him,  because  for  a  long  time  he  had 
astonished  them  by  his  sorceries.     (12)  But  when 
they  gave  credence  to  Philip,  as  he  preached  the 
kingdom  of  God,  in  the  name 'of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah ;  they  were  baptized,  both  men  and  women, 
(18)   And  Simon  himself  also  believed,  and  was 
baptized,  and  adhered  to  Philip.     And  when  he 
saw  the  signs  and  mighty  deeds  which  were  wrought 
by  his  hand,  he  was  surprised  and  astonished. — 
(14)  And  when  the  legates  at  Jerusalem,  heard  that  14 
the  people  of  the  Samaritans  had  received  the  word 
of  God,  they  sent  out  to  them  Simon©  Cephas  and 
John.    (15)   And  the^  went  down,  and  prayed  16 
over  them,  that  they  might  receive  the  Holy  Spirit. 
(16)  For  he  was  not  yet  on  any  one  of  them ;  and  16 
they  had  only  been  baptized  in  the  name  of  our 
Lord  Jesus.      (17)  Then  they  laid  the  hand  on  17 
them;  and  they  received  the  Holy  Spirit. — (18)  And  18 
when  Simon  saw  that,  by  the  imposition  of  a  hand 
of  the  legates,  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given,  he  offered 
them  money,  (19)  saying :  Give  me  also  this  pre-  19 
rogative,^  that  he  on  whom  I  impose  a  hand,  may 
receive  the  Holy  Spirit    (20)  Simon  Cephas  said  20 


10 


11 


12 


13 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    VIll. 


229 


to  him:   Thy  money  go  with  thee  to  perdition  I 
because  thou  hast  supposed,  that  the  gift  of  God 

21  may  be  purchased  by  a  worldly  substance.  (21) 
Thou  hast  no  part  nor  lot  in  this  faith ;  because 

22  thy  heart  is  not  right  before  God.  (22)  Neverthe- 
less, repent  of  this  thy  wickedness,  and  entreat  of 
(Jod,  ii  perhaps  the  guile  of  thy  heart  may  be  for- 

28  given  thee.    ^8)  For  I  perceive  that  thou  art  in 

24  the  bitter  gall  and  in  the  bonds  of  iniquity.  (24)  Si- 
mon answered  and  said :  Intercede  ye  with  God  for 
me,  that  nothing  of  which  ye  have  mentioned  may 

25  come  upon  me.— (25)  And  Simon  and  John,  when 
they  had  testified,  and  had  taught  them  the  word 
of  God,  returned  to  Jerusalem.  And  they  had 
preached  in  many  villages  of  the  Samaritans. 

26  And  the  angel  of  the  Lord  spake  with  Philip, 
and  said  to  him:  Arise,  go  to  the  south,  along  the 
desert  way  that  leadeth  down  from  Jeursalem  to 

27  Gaza.  (27)  And  he  arose  and  went  And  there 
met  him  a  eunuch,  who  had  come  from  Cush,sr  an 
officer  of  Candace,  queen  of  the  Cushites,  who  had 
charge  of  all  her  treasure ;   and  he  had  come  to 

28  worship  at  Jerusalem.  (28)  And  as  he  turned  to 
go,  he  was  sitting  in  his  chariot,  and  was  reading 

29  m  Isaiah  the  prophet.  (29)  And  the  Holy  Spint 
said  to  Philip:  Go  near,  and  join  thyself  to  the 

80  chariot  (80)  And  when  he  came  near,  he  heard 
him  reading  m  Isaiah  the  prophet ;  and  he  said  to 
him:   XJnderstandest  thou    what   thou    readest? 

81  (81)  And  he  said :  How  can  I  understand,  unless 
some  one  instruct  me?  And  he  requested  of 
Philip,  that  he  would  come  up  and  sit  with  him. 

82  (82)  And  the  section  of  scripture  in  which  he  was 
reading,  was  this :  As  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter  he 
was  led  away,  and  as  a  sheep  before  the  shearer  is 
silent,  QQ  also  he  in  his  humilitv  opened  not  his 

88  mouth.  (38)  From  prison  and  firom  judgm^it  he 
was  carried:  and  his  ffeneration,**  who  will  de- 
clare ?  for  his  life  is  t^en  away  from  the  earth. 

84  (84)  And  the  eunuch  said  to  Philip :  I  pray  thee, 
of  whom  speaketh  the  prophet  this  r  of  himself,  or 

85  of  some  other  person  f  (35)  Then  Philip  opened 
his  mouth,  and,  from  that  scripture,  began  to  preach 

86  to  him  concerning  our  Lord  Jesus.  (36)  And  as 
they  proceeded  on  the  way,  they  came  to  a  certain 
place  in  which  there  was  water.    And  the  eunuch 

Digitized  by 


'  Sy.  *ji02 


^  Sy.  Olf; 


Google 


230 


ACTS,   IX. 


"  or,  100^. 


^  or,  tiharp 
points. 


'Sy. 


said:  Lo,  [here  is]  water;  what  doth  forbid,  that  I 
should  be  baptized?    (87)  [And  Philip  said:  K  87 
thou  belie  vest  with  all  thy  heart,  it  is  allowable. 
And  he  answered,  and  said :  I  believe  that  Jesus 
Messiah  is  the  Son  of  God.]*    (38)  And  he  com-  88 
manded  the  chariot  to  stop;  and  they  both  went 
down  to  the  water,  and  Philip  baptized  the  eunuch. 
(39)  And  when  they  came  up  from  the  water,  the  89 
Spirit  of  the  Lord  caught  away  Philip ;  and  the 
eunuch  saw  him  no  more ;  but  he  went  on  his  way 
rejoicing.    (40)  And  Philip  was  found  at  Azotus:  40 
and  from  there  he  travelled  about,  and  preached 
in  all  the  cities,  until  he  came  to  Oassarea. 

And  Saul  was  still  frill  of  threats  and  deadly  IX. 
hatred  against  the  disciples  of  our  Lord.    (2)  And    2 
he  requested  that  a  letter  from  the  high  priest 
might  be  given  him,  unto  Damascus  to  the  syna- 
gogues;  that  if  he  should  find  persons  {)ursuin^ 
this  course,*  men  or  women,  he  might  bind  and 
bring  them  to  Jerusalem.     (3^   And  as  he  was    8 
going,  and  began  to  approach  Damascus,  suddenly 
mere  was  poured  upon  him  a  light  from  heaven. 
(4)  And  he  fell  to  the  ground;  and  he  heard  a    4 
voice  which  said  to  him :  Saul  I  Saul  1  why  perse- 
cutest  thou  me?    It  will  be  hard  for  thee  to  kick 
against  the  goads. ^      (5)   He  replied,  and  said:    6 
Who  art  thou,  my  Lord?     And  our  Lord  said :  I 
am  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  whom  thou  persecutest 
(6)  But  arise  and  go  into  the  city,  and  there.it  will    6 
be  told  thee  what  thou  oughtest  to  do.    (7)  And 
the  men  who  travelled  with  him  in  the  way,  stood 
amazed ;  for  they  heard  merely  the  voice,  and  no 
one  was  visible  to  them.    (8)  And  Saul  arose  from 
the  ground;  and  nothing  was  visible  to  him,  with 
his  eyes  opened.     And  they  took  him  by  the  hand, 
and  led  him  into  Damascus.     (9)  And  he  had  no 
sight  for  three  days ;  and  he  neither  ate  nor  drank. 
--{10)  And  there  was  in  Damascus  a  certain  disci- 
ple, whose  name  was  Ananias.®     And  the  Lord 
said  to  him,  in  a  vision :  Ananias  I     And  he  said : 
Lo,  I  [am  here],  my  Lord.    (11)*  And  our  Lord  11 
said  to  nim:  Anse,  go  to  the  street  which  is  galled 
Straight;  and  inquire  in  the  house  of  Judas,  for 


8 


9 

10 


*  This  87th  verse  is  not  in  any  of  the  earlier  editions,  and  is  excluded  from 
the  text  of  the  London  editions  of  1816  and  1826 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   IX. 


231 


■,:■//■ 


12  Saul  who  is  from  the  city  of  Tarsus :  for,  lo,  while 
he  prayed,  (12)  he  saw  in  vision  a  man  named 
Ananias,  who  came  and  laid  his  hand  upon  him, 

18  that  his  eyes  might  be  opened.  (18)  And  Ananias 
Baid:  My  Lord,  I  have  heard  of  this  man,  from 
many,  how  much  evil  he  hath  perpetrated  towards 

14  thy  saints  at  Jerusalem.  (14)  And,  lo,  here  also, 
he  hath  authority  from  the  chief  priests,  to  bind  all 

15  them  that  call  on  thy  name.  (15)  The  Lord  said 
to  him:  Arise  and  go;  for  he  is  to  me  a  chosen 
vessel,  to  carry  my  name  to  the  Gentiles.^  and  to  *  or,  natiaru 

16  kings,  and  among  the  sons  oi  Israel,  {ili)  For  I 
will  show  him,  how  much  he  is  to  suffer  on  account 

17  of  my  name. — (17)  Then  Ananias  went  to  the 
house  to  him;  and  he  laid  his  hand  upon  him,  and 
said  to  him :  Saul,  my  brother,  our  Lord  Jesus,  he 
who  appeared  to  thee  by  the  way  as  thou  camest 
hath  sent  me,  that  thy  eyes  might  be  opened,  and 

18  thou  be  filled  with  the  Holv  Spirit.  (18)  And  im- 
mediately there  fell  from  his  eyes  something  like 
a  scab ;  and  his  eyes  were  opened.     And  he  arose 

19  and  was  baptized.  (19)  And  he  took  food,  and 
was  invigorated. — And  he  was  [some]  days  with 

20  the  disciples  of  Damascus.  (20)  And  forthwith  he 
announced  Jesus,  in  the  synagogues  of  the  Jews, 

21  that  he  is  the  Son  of  God.  (21)  And  all  they  that 
heard  him  were  amazed;  and  they  said:  Is  not 
this  he,  who  persecuted  all  them  that  call  on  this 
name  in  Jerusalem  ?  And  lo,  for  this  very  thine 
^so,  was  he  sent  hither,  that  he  might  bind  and 

22  carry  them  to  the  chief  priests.  (22)  But  Saul  was 
the  more  strengthened ;  and  he  confounded  those 
Jews  who  dwelt  at  Damascus,  while  he  demonstrated 

28  that  this  is  the  Messiah. — (23)  And  when  he  had 
been  there  many  days,  the  Jews  formed  a  con- 

24  spiracy  against  him,  to  kill  him.  (24)  And  the 
plot  which  they  sought  to  execute  upon  him,  was 
made  knowu  to  Saul :  and  they  watched  the  gates 
of  thjB  city  by  day  and  by  night,  in  order  to  kill 

25  hiuL  (25)  Then  the  disciples  placed  him  in 
a  basket,®  and  let  him  down  from  the  wall  by 
night 

26  And  he  went  to  Jerusalem ;  and  he  wished  to 
join  himself  with  the  disciples,  but  they  were  all 
afraid  of  him,  and  did  not  believe  that  he  was  a  dis- 

27  ciple;    (27)  But  Barnabas  took  him,  and  brought 


=  Gr.tffrupfe 


Digitized  by 


Google 


282 


'  Gr.  churches. 


Sy.jol 


^8y.  l^Klu 


^  Sy.  IAj^ 


ACTS,   IX. 

him  to  the  legates,  and  related  to  them  how  the 
Lord  appeared  to  him  in  the  way,  and  how  he  con- 
versed with  him;  and  how,  in  Damascus,  he  had 
discoursed  openly  in  the  name  of  Jesus.    (28)  And  28 
he  went  in  and  out  with  them,   at  Jerusalem. 
(29^  And  he  spoke  openly  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  29 
ana  disputed  with  those  Jews  who  understood 
Greek.    But  they  wished  to  kill  him:   (80)  and  30 
when  the  brethren  knew  [it],  they  conducted  him 
by  night  to  Caesarea,  and  from  there  they  sent  him 
to  Tarsus.— (81)  Moreover  the  church,^  in  all  Judssa,  81 
and  in  Galilee,  and  in  Samaria,  had  peace  and  was 
edified;   and  it  walked  in  the  fear  of  God,  and 
abounded  in  the  consolation  of  the  Holy  Spirit 
— (82)  And  it  occurred,  that,  as  Simon  travelled  82 
about  the  cities,  he  came  down  to  the  saints  also 
who  dwelt  in  the  city  of  Lydda.^     (83)  And  he  83 
found  a  certain  man  whose  name  was  iElneas,  who 
had  lain  on  a  bed  and  been  paralytic  eight  years. 
(34)   And  Simon  said  to  him :   JSneas,  Jesus  the  84 
Messiah  doth  heal  thee;  arise,  and  spread  thy  bed. 
And  he  rose  up  immediately.    (85)  And  all  they  85 
that  dwelt  at  Lydda  lEmd  Saron,  saw  him;  and  they 
turned  to  God. 

And  there  was  in  the  city  of  Joppa,**  a  certain  36 
female  disciple  named  Tabitha ;  [and]  she  was  rich 
in  good  works,  and  in  the  alms  which  she  did. 

(87)  And  she  fell  sick  in  those  days,  and  died ;  and  87 
they  washed  her,  and  laid  her  in  an  upper  room. 

(88)  And  the  disciples  heard  that  Simon  was  in  the^  88 
city  of  Lydda,  which  is  near  to  Joppa;  and  they* 
sent  two  men  to  him,  to  request  of  him  that  he 
would  not  delay  to  come  to  them.     (89)   And  39 
Simon  arose  and  went  with  them.    And  when  he 
arrived,  they  conducted  him  to  the  chamber ;  and 
there  were  assembled  around  her  all  the  widows, 
weeping,  and  showing  him  the  tunics  and  the 
cloaiks  which  Tabitha  nad  given  them  when  alive. 

(40)  And  Simon  put  all  the  people  out,  and  fell  on  40 
his  knees  and  prayed;  and  he  turned  to  the  corpse, 
and  said:  Tabitha,  arise."     And  she  opened  ner 
eyes;    and  when  she    saw  Simon,   she   sat  up. 

(41)  And  he  reached  to  her  his  hand,  and  raised  41 
her  up:  and  he  called  the  saints  and  the  widows, 
and  presented  her  to  them  alive.    (42)  And  this  42 
became  known  throughout  the  city;    and  many 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   X. 

43  believed  on  our  LonL  (48)  And  he  tarried  in 
Joppa  not  a  few  days  *  ana  he  lodged  in  the  honse 
of  Simon  a  tanner. 

X.      And  there  was  a  certain  man  in  Gsesarea,  whose 

name  was  Cornelius,  a  centurion  of  the  regiment* 

2  called  the  Italian.    (2)  And  he  was  righteous,  and 

feared  God,  he  and  all  his  house ;  [and]  he  did 

much  alms  among  the  people,  and  prayed  to  God 

5  at  all  times.  (8)  This  man  distinctly  saw,  in  a 
vision,  about  the  ninth  hour  of  the  day,  an  angel 
of  God,  who  came  in  to  him  and  said  to  him :  CSr- 

4  neliusi  (4)  And  he  looked  upon  him,  and  was 
afraid;  and  he  said:  What,  my  Lord?  And  the 
angel  said  to  him :  Thy  prayers  and  thy  alms  have 

6  come  up  in  remembrance  before  Goa.  (5)  And 
now,  send  men  to  the  city  of  Joppa,  and  bring 

6  Simon  who  is  called  Cephas.  (6)  Lo,  he  lodgetn 
in  the  house  of  Simon  the  tanner,  which  is  by 

7  the  side  of  the  sea.  (7)  And  when  the  angel  that 
talked  with  him  was  gone,  he  called  two  of  his 
household,**  and  a  soldier  who  feared  God  and  was 

8  obedient  to  him.    (8)  And  he  related  to  them  aU 

9  that  he  had  seen,  and  sent  them  to  Joppa.-P[9) 
And  the  next  day,  as  they  travelled  the  road  and 
approached  the  city,  Simon  ascended  the  roof  to 

10  pray,   at  the  sixth  hour.    (10)  And  he  became 


233 


I' 


ungry,   and   desired   to  eat     And  while   they 
were  providing  for  him,  he  fell^  into  a  trance. 

11  (11)  And  he  saw  the  heavens  opened,  and  a  certain 
vessel  fastened  at  the  four  corners,  and  it  was  like 
a  great  sheet ;  and  it  descended  from  heaven  to  the 

12  earth.  (12)  And  there  were  in  it  all  fourfooted 
animals,   and  creeping  things  of  the  earth,  and 

18  fowls  of  heaven.    (18)  And  a  voice  came  to  him, 

14  which  said :  Simon,  arise,  slay  and  eat.  (14J  And 
Simon  said :  Far  be  it,  my  Lord :  for  never  nave  I 

15  eaten  any  thing  unclean  and  polluted.  (16)  And 
again  the  second  time,  there  was  a  voice  to  him : 
What  God  hath  cleansed,  make  thou  not  unclean. 

16  (16)  And  this  was  done  three  times;  and  the 
vessel  was  taken  up  to  heaven. 

17  And  while  Simon  was  wondering  with  himself 
what  the  vision  he  had  seen  could  aenote,  the  men 
who  were  sent  by  Cornelius  arrived;  and  they 
inquired  for  the  house  in  which  Simon  lodged,  and 


*  or,  edhon 


^Sy.  tonscfhU 
house. 


•  By,  a  trance 
fiUcnhiuL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


284 


ACTS,    X. 


*  Qj.Monsofhis 
kindred. 


*  Sy,  up  to  now. 


came  and  stood  at  the  gate  of  the  court.    (18)  And  18 
there  they  called  out,  and  asked  if  Simon  who  is 
called   Cephas  lodged    there?     (19)   And    while  19 
Simon  was  reflecting  on  the  vision,  the  Spirit  said 
to  him:  Lo,  three  men  are   inquiring  tor  thee 

(20)  Arise,  go  down,  and  accompany  them;  and  20 
let  not  thy  mind  hesitate,  for  I  have  sent  them.— 

(21)  Then  Simon  went  down  to  the  men,  and  said  21 
to  them :  I  am  he  for  whom  ye  inquire :  what  is 
the  cause  for  which  ye  have  come?    (22)  They  22 
say  to  him:  A  certain  man  whose  name  is  Cor- 
nelius, a  centurion  fearing  God,  and  of  whom  all 
the  people  of  the  Jews  bear  good  report,  was  told 

in  vision,  by  a  holy  angel,  to  send  and  bring  thee 
to  his  house,  that  he  might  hear  discourse  from 
thee.    (23)  And  Simon  led  them  in,  and  enter-  23 
tained  them  where  he  lodged. 

And  the  following  day,  he  arose,  departed,  and 
went  with  them:  and  some   of  the  brethren   of 
Joppa  also  went  with  them.    (24)  And  the  next  24 
day,  they  entered  Caesarea.     And  Cornelius  was 
expecting  them :  and  all  the  kindred^-of  his  family, 
and   also  such   intimate  friends  as  he  had,  were 
assembled  withhim.-^25)  And  as  Simon  came  up,  25 
Cornelius  mer^im,  and  lell  down  worshipping  at 
his  feet    (26)  And  Simon  raised  him  up,  and  said  26 
to  him :  Arise ;  I  also  am  a  man.    (27)  And  as  he  27 
talked  with  him,  he  went  in,  and  found  that  many 
had  come  there.     (28)  And  he  said  to  them :  Ye  28 
know,  that  it  is  not  lawful  for  a  Jewish  man,  to 
associate  with  an  alien  who  is  not  of  his  race :  but 
God  hath  showed  me,  that  I  should  not  say  of  any 
one,  that  he  is  defiled  or  unclean.     (29)  Therefore  29 
I  came  readily,  when   ye  sent  for   me.     But,  I 
ask  you,  for  what  cause  did  ye  send   for  me? 
(30)  And  Cornelius  said  to  him:  It  is  four  days  30 
ago,®  that,  lo,  I  was  fasting;  and  at  the  ninth  hour, 
while  I  was  praying  in  my  house,  a  certain  man 
stood  before  me,  clothed  in  white,  (31)  and  said  to  31 
me :  Cornelius^  thy  prayer  is  heard,  and  there  is 
remembrance  of  thy  alms  before  God.    (32)  But  32 
send  to  the  city  of  Joppa,  and  bring  Simon  who  is 
called  Cephas:  lo,  he  lodgeth  in  the  house  of 
Simon  the  tanner,  which  is  by  the  side  of  the 
sea.     And  he  will  come  and  converse  with  thee. 
(33)  And   immediately  I  sent  to  thee:  and  thou  33 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XI. 


235 


hast  done  well  to  come :  and  lo,  we  are  all  of  us 
before  thee,  and  desirous  to  hear  whatever  is  com- 
manded thee  from  God. 

84  And  Simon  opened  his  mouth,  and  said:  Truly, 
I  discover   that   God  is  no  respecter  of  persons : 

85  (35)  but,  among  all  the  nations,  he  who  feareth 
him,  and  Worketh  righteousness,  is  acceptable  with 

86  him.  (36)  For  [this  is]  the  word,  which  he  sent  to 
the  sons  of  Israel,  announcing  to  them  peace  and 
rest  by   Jesus   Messiah, — He   is   Lord   of  all; — 

87  (37)  and  ye  also  know  the  word,  which  was  in 
all  Judaea,  which  commenced  from  Galilee,  after  the 

38  baptism  that  John  preached,  (38)  concerning  Jesus, 

who  was  of  Nazareth,  whom  God  anointed  with 

the  Holy  Spirit  and  with  power.**^  And  he  it  was,    Sy.  ]]>i^> 

*    who  went  about  and  healed  those'^that  were'su'BEsr-" ' 

SSTing  JronT  evil,  "^ecauseT (j6d_was'  with'Tum.     (39) 

■"  And  we  [arej  his  witnesses,  as  to  whatever  ^e  dia 

in  all  the  region  of  Judaea  and  in  Jerusalem.     This 

same  person  the  Jews  hanged  on  a  tree,  and  slew 

40  him.  (40)  And  him  did  God  raise  up,  on  the  third 
day ;  and  caused  him  to  be  seen  with  naked  eyes 

41  (41)  not  indeed  by  all  the  people,  but  by  us,  who 
were  chosen  of  God  to  be  his  witnesses,  [and]  who 
ate  and  drank  with  him  after  his  resurrection  from 

42  the  dead.    (42)  And  he  commanded  us  to  proclaim 
and  testify  to  the  people,  that  he  is  appointed*  of  f  Sy.  separated 
God  to  be  judge  of  the  living  and  of  the  dead. 

43  (43)  And  of  him  all  the  prophets  testify,  that  who- 
ever believeth  in  his  name,  will  receive  remission 

44  of  sins. — (44)  And  while  Simon  ^waa  uttering  these 
things,  the  Holy  Spirit  overshadowed**  all   them  *  or,  covered. 

45  that  were  hearing  the  word.  (45)  And  the  circum- 
cised brethren  who  came  with  him,  were  amazed 
and  astonished,  that  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  was 

46  poured  out  upon  tja^Gentiles  also.  (46)  For  they 
heard  them  speakwitE'^verse  tongues,  and  mag- 

47  nifv  God.  (47)  And  Simon  said:  Can  any  one 
forbid  water,  that  those  should  not  be  baptized, 
they  who  have  received,  lo,  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  well 

48  as  we?  (48)  Then  he  commanded  them  to  be  bap- 
tized in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.  And 
they  requested  him  to  remain  with  them  [some] 
days. 

XL    And  it  was  reported  to  the  legates  and  the 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


286 


*  By.  words. 
^  or^heuned. 


^  Sy.  wen  still 
^  or,  sdhaiion. 


ACTS,    XL 

brethren  in  Judaea,  that  the  Gentiles  also  had  re- 
ceived the  word  of  Q-qdj  (2)  And  when  Simon 
went  up  to  Jerusaleini  lEey  who  were  of  the  cir- 


6 


cumcision  contended  with  liini,  (8)  saving;  that  he    8 
had  gone  in  to  be  with  uncircumcised  persons,  and 
had  eaten  with  them. — (4)  And  Simon  beran  to    4 
address  them  methodically:  (5)  As  I  was  in  Joppa,    5 
praying,  I  saw  in  vision,  that  a  certain  vessel  ae- 
scended,  which  was  like  a  sheet,  and  it  was  tied  at 
its  four  corners;  and  it  descended  fJpom  heaven, 
and  came  to  me.    (6)  And  I  looked  upon  it^  and 
I  saw  that  in  it  were  fourfooted  animals,  and  rep- 
tiles of  the  earth,  and  fowls  of  heaven.    (7)  And    7 
I  heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me :  Simon,  arise, 
sky  and  eat    (8)  And  I  said:  Far  be  it,  my  Lord.    8 
For  never  ham  any  thing  polluted  or  unclean 
entered  my  mouth.    (9)  And  again,  a  voice  from    9 
heaven  said  to  me :  What  God  hath  cleansed,  make 
thou  not  unclean.    (10)  And  this  was  done  three  10 
times:   and  the  whole  was  taken  up  to  heaven. 
(11)  And  at  the  same  instant,  three  men,  who  11 
were  sent  to  me  by  Cornelius  from  Csesarea,  came 
and  stood  at  the  gate  of  the  court  where  I  lodged. 
(12^  And  the  Spirit  said  to  me:  Go  with  them,  12 
witnout  hesitation.     And  tl^ese  six  brethren  went 
also  with  me,  and  we  entered  the  man's  house. 
(13)  And  he  related  to  us,  how  he  had  seen  an  13 
angel  in  his  house,  who  stood  and  said  to  him: 
Send  to  the  city  of  Joppa,  and  bring  Simon  who 
is  called  Cephas;  (14)  and  he  will  utter  to  thee  14 
discourses,^  bv  which  thou  wilt  live,^  thou  and  all 
thy  house.    (l5)  And  when  I  there  commenced  15 
speaking,  the  Holy  Spirit  overshadowed  them,  as  it 
(fid  us  from  the  begmning.     (16)  And  I  remem-  16 
bered  the  word  of  our  Lord,  when  he  said:  John 
baptized  with  water,  but  ye  shall  be  baptized  with 
the  Holy  Spirit.    (17)  If  then  God  equally  gave  17 
the  gift  to  tne  Gentiles  that  believed  in  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  as  he  did  to  us :  who  was  I,  that  I 
could  forbid  God? — (18)  And  when  they  heard  18 
these  words,   they  desisted  ;c   and   they  glorified 
God  and  said .  Now  to  the  Gentiles  also  doth  God 
give  repentance  unto  lifeA 

And  they  who  were  dispersed,  by  the  oppres-  19 
aion  which  occurred  on  account  of  Stephen,  trav- 
elled as  far  as  Phenicia,  and  even  to  tne  country 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XIJL 


237 


of  Cyprus,  and  to  Antioch,  speaking  the  word  to 

20  none  except  to  Jews  only.  (20)  And  there  were 
some  of  them  from  Cyprus  and  from  Cyrene,  who 
went  up  to  Antioch,  and  spoke  to  the  weeks,  and 

21  preached  concerning  our  Lord  Jegus.  (21)  And 
the  hand  of  the  Lord  was  with  them ;  and  many 

22  believed,  and  turned  to  the  Lord.  (22)  And  this 
came«  to  the  ears  of  the  sons  of  the  church  at 
Jerusalem:  and  they  sent  Barnabas  to  Antioch. 

23  (28)  And  when  he  came  there,  and  saw  the  grace 
of  God,  he  rejoiced:  and  he  entreated  them,  that 
with  all  their  heart,  they  would  adhere  to  our 

24  Lord.  (24)  For  he  was  a  good  man,  and  was  ftdl 
of  the  Holy  Spirit,   and  of  faith.     And  many 

25  people  were  added  to  our  Lord.— {25)  And  he 

26  went  away  to  Tarsus,  to  seek  for  Saul.  (26)  And 
when  he  had  found  him,  he  brought  him  with  him 
to  Antioch.  And  a  whole  year  they  met  together 
in  the  church,  and  instructed  many  people. — From 
that  time  forth,  the  disciples  were  first  called 
Christians,^  at  Antioch. 

27  In  those  days  came  prophets  thither  from  Jeru- 

28  salem.  (28)  And  one  of  them  whose  name  was 
Agabus,  stood  up  and  informed  them,  by  the 
Spirit,  that  there  would  be  a  great  famine  in  all 
the  country.     And  that  famine  occurred  in  the 

29  days  of  Claudius  Caesar.  (29)  And  moreover  the 
disciples,  each  of  them  according  to  his  several 
ability,  fi:  determined  to  send  to  me  relief  of  the 

30  brethren  who  dwelt  in  Judaea.  (30)  And  they 
sent,  by  the  hand  of  Barnabas  and  Saul,  unto  the 
Elders  there. 

XTT.  And  at  that  time  Herod  the  king,  who  was  sur- 
named  Agrippa,  laid  hands  on  some  of  the  church, 

2  to  maltreat  tnem.    (2)  And  he  killed  James  the 

3  brother  of  John  with  the  sword.  (8)  And  when 
he  saw  that  this  pleased  the  Jews,  he  proceeded^ 
also  to  arrest  Simon  Cephas.     And  the  days  of 

4  unleavened  bread  were  then  passing.  (4)  He 
seized  him  and  cast  him  into  prison,^  and  deliv- 
eied  him  to  sixteen  soldiers,  who  were  to  guard 
him;   that  he  might,  after  the  passover,  deliver 

5  him  up  to  the  people  of  the  Jews.  (5)  And  while 
Simon  was  in  custody  in  the  prison,  continual 
prayer  to  God  in  his  behalf  was  oflFered  to  God 


Sy.  was  heart 
by. 


'Sy. 

]i  iOrni!?o 

ssGr. 

Xpi0'riavoi. 


'  or,  means. 


^Sj,  added. 

^  Sy.  houee  of 
prtsofien. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


288 


ACTS,   XII. 


Sy.  fertaining 


^  By,  turned  up^ 
on  her  course. 

®  Sy.  iirt  con- 
fused  to  he 
ctnftued 


by  the  church.— (6)  And*  on  the  night  before*^  the    6 
morning  in  which  he  was  to  be  delivered  up,  while 
Simon  was  sleeping  between  two  soldiers,  and  was 
bound  with  two  chains,  and  othera  were  guarding 
the  doors  of  the  prison ;  (7^  an  angel  of  the  Lord    7 
stood  over  him,  and  a  light  snone  in  all  the  building; 
and  he  pricked  his  side,  and  awaked  him,  and  said 
to  him:  Arise,  instantly.    And  the  chains  fell  from 
his  hands.    (8)  And  the  angel  said  to  him :  Gird    8 
thy  loins,  and  put  on  thy  sandals.    And  he  did  so. 
And  again  he  said  to  him :  Wrap  thyself  in  thy 
cloak,  and  come  after  me.    (9])  And  he  went  out    9 
and  followed  him,  not  knowing  that  what  had 
been  done  bv  the  angel  was  a  reality ;  for  he  sup- 
posed, that  he  saw  a  vision.     (10)  And  when  the  10 
first  ward  was  passed  and  the  second,  they  came 
to  the  iron  gate,  and  it  opened  to  them  of  its  own 
accord.    And  when  they  had  gone  out,  and  had 
passed  one  street,  the  angel  departed  from  him. 
(11)  Then  Simon  recognized  [where  he  was] ;  and  11 
he  said :  Now  I  know,  in  reality,  that  God  hath 
sent  his  angel,  and  delivered  me  from  the  hand  of 
Herod  the  king,  and  from  what  the  Jews  were 
devising  against  me. — (12)  And  when  he  had  con-  12 
sidered,  he  went  to  the  house  of  Mary,  the  mother 
of  John  surnamed  Mark ;  because  many  brethren 
were  assembled  there  and  praying.    (13)  And  he  13 
knocked  at  the  gate  of  the  court;   and  a  maid 
named  Shoda  came  to  reply  to  him.    (14)  And  14 
she  recognized  the  voice  of  Simon:  and,  in  her 

^*oy,  she  did  not  open  to  him  the  gate,  but  ran 
5ack,<^  and  told  them:  Lo,  Simoii  is  standing  at 
the  gate  of  the  court.     (15)  They  said  to  her:  15 
Thou  art  delirious.©     But  she  maintained  that  it 
was  a  fact.     They  said  to  her:  Perhaps  it  is  his 
ghost.    (16)  And  Simon  was  knocking  at  the  gate;  16 
and  they  went  out,  saw  him,  and  were  astonished. 
(17)  And  he  beckoned  to  them  with  the  hand  to  17 
be  still ;  and  he  went  in,  and  related  to  them  how 
the  Lord  had  released  him  from  the  prison.     And 
he  said  to  them :  Tell  these  things  to  James  and  to 
the  brethren.     And  he  went  out,  and  departed  to 
another  place. — (18)  And  when  it  was  morning,  18 
there  was  a  great  dispute  among  the  soldiers  con- 
cerning Simon,  what  had  become  of  him.   (19)  And  19 
Herod,  when  he  sought  him,  and  could  not  find 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XllL 


him,  arraigned^  the  keepers,  and  sentenced  them 
to  die.  And  he  went  from  Judaea,  and  resided  at 
Osdsarea. 

20  And  because  he  was  angry  against  the  Tyrians 
and  Sidonians,  they  assembled  and  came  to  him 
in  a  body;  and  having  persuaded  Blastus,  the 
king's  chamberlain,  they  begged  of  him  that  thej 
might  have  peace;  because  the  supplies  of  their 
country  were  derived  from  the  kingdom  of  Herod. 

21  (21)  Ajid  on  a  day  appointed,  fir  Herod  was  arrayed 
in  royal  apparel,  and  sat  on  a  tribunal,  and  made  a 

22  speech  to  the  assembly.  (22)  And  all  the  people 
shouted,  and  said :  These  are  the  utterances**  of  a 

28  God,  and  not  of  a  mortal.  (23)  And,  because  he 
gave  not  the  glory  to  God,  immediately  the  angel 
of  God  smote  him ;  and  he  was  eaten  of  worms, 

24  and  died. — (24)  And  the  gospel  of  God  was  pro- 
claimed, and  made*  progress. 

25  And  Barnabas  and  Saul,  after  they  had  com- 
pleted their  ministration,  returned  from  Jerusalem 
to  Antioch.    And  they  took  with  them  John^  who 

^TTT.  Yf^  ^nrn^^me^^  ]S^pk^--^XTTT.^  Now  tkere  were 

'      in  the  ckurch  at  Antioch,  [several]  prophets  and 

teachers;  Barnabas,  and  Simon  called  Nicer,  and 

Lucius  who  was  from  the  city  Gyrene,  and  Menaen, 

a  son  of  the  guardians  of  H!erod  the  Tetrarch,  and 

2  SauL  (2)  And  while  they  werre  fasting  and  ma- 
king supplication  to  God,  the.  Holy  Spirit  said  to 
them :  Separate  to  me  Saul  and  Barnabas,  for  the 

3  work  to  which  I  have  called  them.  (8)  And  after 
they  had  fasted  and  prayed,  they  laid  the  hand  on 

4  them,  and  sent  them  away.— (4)  And  they,  being 
sent  forth  by  the  Holy  Spirit  went  down  to  Se- 
leucia,  and  from  there  they  went  by  sea  as  far  as 

6  Cyprus.  (5)  And  when  they  entered  the  city  of 
Salamis,  they  announced  the  word  of  our  Lord  in 
the  synagogues  of  the  Jews.      And  John  minis- 

6  tered  to  them.     (&)  And  when  they  had  travelled 
■      over  the  wJaole  island  as  far  as  the  city  Paphos, 

they  found  a  certain  man,  a  sorcerer,  a  Jew,  who 
was  a  false  prophet,  and  whose  name  was  Bar- 

7  Surna.*  (7)  He  adhered  to  a  wise  man,  who  was 
the  proconsul,  and  was  called  Sergius  Paulus. 
And  the  proconsul  sent  for  Saul  and  Barnabas, 
and  requested  to  hear  from  them  the  word  of  God. 

8  (8)  And  this  sorcerer,   Bar-Suma,   (whose  name 


Digitized  by 


»  ( r,  celebrated. 

^  Sy.  daughten 
of  the  votes. 


Sj.  grew. 


Sy.judgei. 


Sy. 


Google 


240 


ACTS,   XIII. 


•Sy.l 


is  interpreted,  Elymas,)  witlistood  them;  because 
he  wished  to  divert  the  proconsul  from  the  faith. 
(9)  And  Saul  who  is  called  Paul,  was  filled  with    9 
the  Holy  Spirit ;  and  he  looked  upon  him,  {10)  and  10 
said :  O  thou  full  of  all  subtilties,  and  all  miscniefe, 
thou  child  of  the  calumniator,  and  enemy  of  all 
righteousness;  wilt  thou  not  cease  to  pervert  the 
right  ways  of  the  Lord?    (11)  And  now,  the  hand  11 
of  the  Lord  is  upon  thee,  and  thou  shalt  be  blind, 
and  shalt  not  see  the  sun  for  a  time.    And  imme- 
diately there  fell  upon  him  a  mist  and  darkness ; 
and  he  went  about,  inquiring  who  would  take  him 
by  the  hand.     (12)  And  when  the  proconsul  saw  12 
what  occurred,  he  was  astonished;  and  he  believed 
the  doctrine  of  the  Lord. 

And  Paul  and  Barnabas  went  by  sea,  from  the  IS 
city  of  Paphos,  and  came  to  Perga,  a  city  of  Pam- 
phylia.  _  And  John  separated  from  them,  and  went  ^ 
away  to  JerusalemA  (14)  And  they  departed  from  14 
Pergaj  and  came  to  Antioch,  a  city  of  risidia:  and 
they  entered  the  synagogue,  on  the  sabbath  day, 
and  sat  down.     (15)  And  after  the  law  had  been  15 
•  ■  ■  n  read,  and  the  prophets,  the  Elders^  of  the  syna- 
gogue sent  to  them,  and  said:  Men,  brethren,  u  ye 
have  a  word  of  exhortation,  address  the  people. — 
(16)  And  Paul  arose,  and  waved  his  hand,  and  16 
said:  Men,  sons  of  Israel,  and  ye  that  fear  God, 
hear  ye.    (17)  The. God  of  this  people  chose  our  17 
fathers,  and  raised  them  up,  and  multiplied  them, 
when  they  resided  in  the  land  of  Egypt;  and,  with 
a  high  arm,  he  brought  them  out  of  it    (18^  And  18 
he  fed  them  in  the  wilderness  forty  years.    (19)  And  19 
he  extirpated  seven  nations  in  the  land  of  Canaan,     , 
and    gave   them  their  land    for   an  inheritance. 
(20)  And  for  four  hundred  and  fiftv  years  he  gave  20 
them  judges,  until  Samuel  the  prophet    (21)  And  21 
then  they  asked  for  themselves  a  king :  and  God 
gave  them  Saul  the  son  of  Kish,  a  man  of  the  tribe 
of  Benjamin,  during  forty  years.    (22)  And  he  re- 
moved him,  and  raised  up  to  them  David  as  king: 
and  he  testified  of  him,  and  said :   I  have  found 
David  the  son  of  Jesse,  a  man  after  my  heart :  he 
will  do  all  my  pleasure.     (28)  From  the  seed  of 
this  man,  hath  God  raised  up  to  Israel,  as  he 
promised,  Jesus  a  deliverer.    (24)  And,  before  his  24 
advent,  he  sent  John  to  proclaim  the  baptism  cS 


22 


23 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XIII. 


241 


25  repentance  to  all  the  people  of  Israel.  (25)  And 
while  John  was  fulfilling  his  ministry,  he  said: 
Who,  suppose  ye,  that  I  am?  I  am  not  he.  But 
lo,  he  Cometh  after  me ;  of  whom  I  am  not  worthy 

26  to  untie ,  his  shoe-strings. — (26)  Men,  brethren, 
children  of  the  stock  of  Abraham,  and  all  who, 
with  yon,  fear  God,  to  you  is  this  word  of  life® 

27  sent  (27)  For,  those  mhabitants  of  Jerusalem 
and  their  chiefs,  did  not  apprehend  it;  neither 
[dill  they  apprehend]  also  the  writings  of  the 
prophets,  which  are  read  every  sabbath ;  but  they 
condemned  him,  and  fulfilled  all  the  things  writ- 

28  ten.  (28)  And  while  they  found  no  ground  for 
[his]  death,  they  desired  of  Pilate  that  they  might 

29  kiU  him.  (29)  And  when  they  had  fulfilled  all 
that  was  written  concerning  him,  they  took  him 
down  fi'om  the  cross,  and  laid  him  in  a  sepulchre. 

30  (30)  But  God  raised  him  from  the  dead.     (31)  And 

31  he  was  seen  many  days,  by  them  who  came  np 
with  him  fi-om  Galilee  to  Jerusalem;  and  they  are 

82  now  his  witnesses  to  the  people.  (82)  And  lo,  we 
also  announce  to  you,  that  tne  promise,  which  was 

33  made  to  our  fathers,  (33)  lo,  God  hath  fulfilled  it  to 
us  their  children,  in  that  he  raised  up  Jesus;  as  it 
is  written  in  the  second  psalm :  Thou  art  my  Son ; 

84  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  (34)  And  God  hath 
so  raised  him  firom  the  dead,  that  he  will  not  return 
again  and  see  corruption ;  as  he  said :  I  will  give 

35  to  you  the  sure^  grace  of  David.  (35)  And  again 
he  said,  in  another  place :  Thou  hast  not  given  thy 

86  devout  one  to  see  corruption.  (36)  For  David,  in 
his  generation,  served  the  pleasure  of  God,  and 
went  to  rest,e  and  was  added  to  his  fathers,  and 

87  saw  corruption.     (37)  But  this  person,  whom  God 

38  raised  up,  did  not  see  corruption.  (38)  Know 
therefore,  brethren,  that  through  this  man  remis- 

39  sion  of  sins  is  proclaimed  to  you.  (89)  And  every 
one  that  belie veth  in  this  man,  is  made  just^  fi'om 
all  things,  from  which*  ye  could  not  be  made  just 

40  by  the  law  of  Moses.  (40)  Beware,  therefore,  lest 
that  come  upon  you,  which  is  written  in  the  proph- 

41  ets:  (41)  Behold,  ye  despisers,  and  wonder,  and 
perish ;  for  I  work  a  work  in  your  days,  which  ye 
will  not  believe,  though  a  man  relate  it  to  you. 

42  And  when  they  had  gone  fi-om  them,  they  be- 
sought them  to  speak  the  same  things^  to  them  the 


«   or,  salvation. 


^  or,  faithfiii 


oTffell  asleej. 


'  Sy.  *0>>»Ld 


s  Sy. 

these  words. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


242 


ACTS,   XIV. 


^  or,  stUvaticm, 
Sy.     >Vi^^fn 


next  sabbath  day.    (43)  And  when  the  synagogue  48 
was  dismissed,  many  Jews  went  after  them,  and 
likewise  proselytes  who  feared  God.    And  they 
conversed  with  them,  and  persuaded  them  to  ad- 
here to  the  grace  of  God. — (44)  And  the  next  sab-  44 
bath,  the  whole  city  assembled  to  hear  the  word 
of  God,    (45)  And  when  the  Jews  saw  the  great  46 
assembly,  they  were  filled  with  envy,  and  set  them- 
selves against  the  words  which  raul  spoke,  and 
blasphemed.    (46)  And  Paul  and  Barnabas  said,  46 
openly :  To  you  first,  ought  the  word  of  God  to 
be  spoken ;  but  because  ye  repel  it  from  you,  and 
decide,  against  yourselves,  that  ye  ^xe  not  worthy 
of  life  eternal,  lo,  we  turn  ourselves  to  the  Gen- 
tiles.   (47)  For  so  hath  our  Lord  commanded  us ;  47 
as  it  is  written:   I  have  set  thee  a  light  to  the 
Gentiles ;  that  thou  shouldst  be  for  life**  unto  the 
ends  of  the  earth.    (48)  And  when  the  Gentiles  48 
heard  [this],  they  rejoiced  and  glorified  God.    And 
those  believed,  who  were  appointed^  to  life  eternal. 
(49)  And  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  talked  of  in  49 
all  that  region. — (50)  But  the  Jews  stirred  up  the  50 
chiefs  of  the  city,  and  the  opulent  women  who 
with  them  feared  God,  and  set  up  a  persecution 
against  Paul  and  against  Barnabas,  and  expelled 
them  from  their  borders.    (51)  And  when  they  51 
went  out,  they  shook  off  the  dust  of  their  feet 
against  them,  and  went  to  the  city  of  Iconium. 
(52)  And  the  disciples  were  filled  with  joy,  and  52 
with  the  Holy  Spirit. 

And  they  came  and  entered  into  the  synagogue  XIV. 
of  the  Jews,  and  so  spoke  with  them,  that  many 
of  the  Jews  and  of  the  Greeks  believed.    (2)  But    2 
Jews   of  the   class   of   unbelievers,   excited  the 
Gentiles,  to  maltreat  the  brethren.    (3)  And  they    S 
continued  there  a  long  time,  and  spoke  openly 
concerning  the  Lord ;  and  he  gave  testimony  to  the 
word  of  his  grace,  by  the  signs   and  prodigies 
which  he  wrought  by  their  hands.     (4)  And  the    4 
whole  multitude  of  the  city  was  divided ;  and  a  part 
were  with  the  Jews,  and  a  part  adhered  to  the 
legates.    (5)  And  an  assault  was  made  on  them,  by    6 
the  Gentiles,  and  by  the  Jews  and  their  chiefe,  to 
insult  them,  and  to  stone  them  with  stones.   (6)  And    6 
when  they  knew  [it],  they  departed  and  fled  to  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XIV. 


243 


cities  of  Ljcaonia  and  Lystra  and  Derbe,  and  to  the 

7  villages  around  them;  (7)  and  there  they  preached. 

8  — (8)  And  a  ceiiiain  man  dwelt  in  the  city  Lystra, 
who  was  aiflicted  in  his  feet,  a  cripple  from  his 

9  mother's  womb,  who  had  never  walked.    (9)  He 
heard  Paul  speak:  and  when  Paul  saw  him,  and 

10  knew  that  he  had  faith  to  live;*  (10)  he  said  tq 
him,  with  a  loud  voice :  In  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  I  say  to  thee,  Eise  upon  thv  'feet 

11  And  he  sprang  up,  stood,  and  walked.  (11)  And 
the  assembly  of  people,  when  they  saw  what  Paul 
had  done,  raised  their  voice,  and  said,  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  country:  The  gods  have  assumed 
the  likeness  of  men,  and  have  come  down  to  us. 

12  (12)  And  they  named  Barnabas  the  Lord  of  the 
U-ods ;  and  Paul  Hermes,  *»  because  he  commenced 

IS  the  speaking.  (18)  And  the  priest**-  of  the  Lord  of 
the  Gods,  who  was  without  the  city,  brought  oxen 
and  garlands  to  the  gate  of  the  court  where  they 
lodged,   and  was  disposed  to    oflFer  sacrifices  to 

14  them,— (14)  But  Barnabas  and  Paul,  when  they 
heard  [it],  rent  their  garments,  and  sprang  and 

15  went  among  the  throgg^d  Q5^  and  called  out,  and 
said :  Men,  what  do  ye?  We  also  are  frail  mortals 
like  yourselves,  who  preach  to  you,  that  ye  should 
turn  from  these  useless  things,  unto  the  living  God, 
who  made  heaven  and  earth  and  seas,  and  what- 

16  ever  is  in  them.    (16)  He,  in  former  ages,  left  all 

17  the  nations  to  go  in  their  own  ways :  (17)  although 
he  did  not  leave  himself  without  testimony,  whue 
he  did  them  good  from  heaven,  and  sent  down  the 
rain,  and  made  the  fruits  to  grow  in  their  seasons, 
and  filled  their  hearts  with  food  and  pleasure. 

18  (18)  And,  by  saying  these  things,  they  with  diffi- 
cultv  prevented  the  people  from  oflFering  sacrifice 
to  tnem. 

19  But  Jews  came  hither  from  Iconium  and  An- 
tioch,  and  excited  the  people  against  them.  And 
they  stoned  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the  city, 

20  supposing  that  he  was  dead.  (20)  And  the  disci- 
ples assembled  around  him ;  and  he  arose,  and  went 
mto  the  city. — And  the  next  day,  he  departed  from 
there,  with  Barnabas ;  and  they  came  to  the  city  of 

21  Derbe.  (21)  And  while  they  were  preaching  to 
the  inhabitants  of  that  city,  they  made  many  disci- 
ples.    And  turning  back,  they  came  to  the  city 


»  or,  be  cured. 


•>Sy. 

Gr.  EpjXTJf . 
0  Sy.  I^LOOO 


•»Sy. 
Gr.  05^X0^. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


244 


ACTS,   XV 


«  Sy.  oSniol 

<  Sy.  ]m'lmn 


'  or»  be  mved. 


**  Sy.  home. 


e   or  doctrine. 


^  Sy.  ward. 


22 


28 


Lystra,  and  to  Iconium,  and  to  Antioch,  (22)  con- 
firming the  souls  of  the  disciples,  and  entreating 
them  to  persevere  in  the  faith ;  and  they  told  them, 
that  it  was  necessary,  through  much  affliction,  to 
enter  into  the  kingaom  of  God.     (23)  And  they 
established©  for  them  Elders**  in  each  church,  while 
they  fasted  with  them,  and  prayed,  and  commended 
them  to  our  Lord  in  whom  they  believed.   (24)  And  24 
when  they  had  travelled  over  the  region  of  Pisidia, 
thev  came  to  Pamphylia.     (25)  And  when  they  25 
had  spoken  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  city  of 
Perga,   they  went  down  to  Attalia.     (26)  And  26 
thence  they  proceeded  by  sea,  and  came  to  Anti- 
och ;  because  from  there  they  had  beeu  commended 
to  the  grace  of  the  Lord,  for  that  work  which  they 
had  accomplished.     ^27)  And  when  they  had  col-  27 
lected  together  the  whole  church,  they  narrated  all 
that  Goa  had  wrought  with  them,  and  that  he  had 
opened  a  door  of  faith  to  the'  Gentiles.     (28)  And  28 
they  remained  there  a  long  time  with  the  disciples. 

And  certain  men  came  down  from  Judaea,  and  XV. 
taught  the  brethren,  that  unless  ye  be  circumcised, 
in  accordance  with  the  rite  of  the  law,  ye  cannot 
have  life,a    (2)  And  Paul  and  Barnabas  had  much    2 
trouble  and  disputation  with   them.     And  it  re- 
sulted, that  Paul  and  Barnabas,  and  others  with 
them,  went  up  to  the  legates  and  Elders  at  Jerusa- 
lem, because  of  this  matter.     (3)  And  the  church    8 
waited  on  them,  and  sent  them  away;  and  they 
travelled  through  all  Phenicia  and  the  territory**  of 
the  Samaritans,   narrating  the  conversion  of  the 
Gentiles,  and  causing  great  joy  to  all  the  brethren. 
(4)  And  when  they  came  to  Jerusalem,  they  were     4 
received  by  the  church,  and  by  the  Elders,  and  by 
the  legates ;  and  theu  recounted  all  that  God  had 
wrought  by  them.     (5)  And  some  who  from  the    5 
sect*^  of  the  Pharisees  had  believed,  rose  up  and 
said :  It  is  necessary  for  you  to  circumcise  them, 
and  to  command  them  to  observe  the  law  of  Moses. 

.  And  the  legates  and  Elders  assembled,  to  look    6 
into  this  matter.^^     (7)  And  when  there  had  been    7 
much  discussion,  Simon  arose  and  said  to  them: 
Men,  brethren,  ye  know  that,  from  the  earlier  days, 
God  chose  that  from  my  mouth  the  Gentiles  should 
hear  the  word  of  the  gospel,  and  should  believe. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XV. 


246 


8  (8)  And  God,  who  knoweth  what  is  in  hearts,  bore 
testimony  concerning  them,  and  gave  the  Holy 

9  Spirit  to  them,  even  as  to  ns.    (9)  And  he  made  no 
distinction  between  them  and  us ;  because  he  puri- 

10  fied  their  hearts  by  faith.  (10)  And  now,  why 
tempt  ye  God,  by  putting  a  yoke  on  the  necks  of 
the  disciples,  which  neither  our  fathers  nor  we  could 

11  bear?  (11)  But  we  believe,  that  we  as  well  as 
they,  are  to  have  life^  by  the  grace  of  our  Lord 

12  Jesus  Messiah. — (12)  And  the  whole  assembly  were 
silent,  and  listened  to  Paul  and  Barnabas,  who  re- 
lated how  God  by  their  hands  had  wrought  signs 

13  and  prodigies  among  the  Gentiles. — (18)  And  after 
they  ceased,^  James  arose  and  said :  Men,  brethren, 

14  hearken  to  me.  (14)  Simon  hath  related  to  you, 
how  God  hath  begun  to  elect  a  people  for  his  name 

15  from  among  the  Gentiles.  (15)  And  with  this  the 
words  of  the  prophets  accord,  as  it  is  written: 

16  (16)  After  these  things  I  will  return,  and  will  set 
up  the  tabernacle  of  David  that  had  fallen ;  and 
will  build  that  which  was  in  ruins  in  it,  and  will 

17  raise  it  up:  (17)  so  that  the  residue  of  men  may 
seek  the  Lord,  and  all  the  nations  on  whom  my 
name  is  called ;  saith  the  Lord,  who  doth  all  these 

18  things.     (18)  Known,  from  of  old,  are  the  works  of 

19  God,  (19)  Therefore  I  say  to  you,  let  them  not 
crush  those  who  from  among  the  Gentiles  haVe 

20  turned  unto  God.  (20)  But  let  word  be  sent  to 
them,  that  they  keep  aloof  from  the  defilement  of 
a  sacrifice  [to  idols],  and  from  whoredom,  and  from 

21  what  is  strangled,  and  from  blood.  (21)  For  in 
every  city,  from  former  ages,  Moses  hath  heralds 
in  the  synagogues,  who  read  him  every  sabbath. 

22  Then  the  legates  and  Elders,  with  all  the  church, 
chose  men  from  among  themselves,  and  sent  them 
to  Antioch,  with  Paul  and  Barnabas;  [namely], 
Jude,  who  was  called  Barsabas,  and  Silas, »  men 

23  who  were  chiefs**  among  the  brethren.  (23)  And 
they  wrote  a  letter  by  them,  thus :  The  legates  and 
Elders  and  brethren,  to  them  that  are  in  Antioch, 
and  in  Syria,  and  in  Cilicia,  brethren  who  are  from 

24  the  Gentiles,  greeting:*  (24)  We  have  heard,  that 
some  Tiave  gone  from  us  and  disquieted  you,  by 
discourses,  and  have  subverted  your  minds,  ^^  by 
saying,  That  ye  must  be  circumcised  and  keep  the 
law ;  things  which  we  have  not  conmianded  them. 

Digitized  by 


•   or,  bt  saved. 


*  Sy,  were  silent. 


^  Sy.  XmJi 

»  Sy,  peace, 

^  or,  s(nUs 

Google 


246 


ACTS,    XV. 


1  or,  in  discourse^ 


"Sy.  AaJDJ 


25 


26 

27 


29 


80 


(25)  Therefore  we  all  have  thought  fit,  when  assem- 
bled, to  choose  and  send  men  to  you,  with  our  be- 
loved Paul  and  Barnabas,  (26)  men  who  have 
given  up  their  lives  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah.  (27)  And  we  have  sent  with  them  Jude 
and  Silas,  that  they  may  tell  you  the  same  things 
orally.*  (28)  For  it  was  pleasing  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  28 
and  to  us,  that  there  should  not  be  laid  upon  yon 
anj  additional  burden,  besides  these  necessary 
thmgs :  (29)  that  ye  keep  aloof  from  a  sacrifice  [to 
idols],  and  from  blood,  and  from  what  is  strangled, 
and  from  whoredom.  And  if  ye  keep  yourselves 
from  these,  ye  will  do  well.  Be  ye  steacnast  in  the 
Lord. 

And  they  who  were  sent,  came  to  Antioch,  and 
assembled  all  the  people,  and  delivered  the  letter. 
'^^'>  And  when  they  nad  read  [it],  they  rejoiced  81 
ana  were  comforted.    (32)  And  with  abundant  dis-  82 
course  they  strengthened  the  brethren;   and  the 
associates™  of  Jude  and  Silas  established  them,  be- 
cause they  also  were  prophets.    (38)  And  when  88 
they  had  been  there  some  time,  the  brethren  dis- 
missed them  in  peace  to  the  legates.     [(34)*  But  it  84 
was  the  pleasure  of  Silas  to  remain  there.]     (36)  85 
Paul  also  and  Barnabas  remained  at  Antioch ;  and 
they  taught  and  proclaimed,  with  many  others,  the 
word  of  God. 

And  after  [some]  days,  Paul  said  to  Barnabas:  86 
Let  us  return,  and  visit  the  brethren  in  every  city, 
in  which  we  have  preached  the  word  of  God;  and 
let  us  see  what  they  are  doing.     (37)  And«Barna-  37 
bas  was  disposed  to  take  John,  who  was  surnamed 

Marl^     (.^ft)  But  Paul  was  not  willing  to  take  him  38 

with  them;  because  he  left  them  when  they  were 
in  Pamphylia,  and  went  not  with  them.     (39)  In  89 
consequence  of  this  strife,  they  separated  from  each 
other:  and  Barnabas  took  Mark,  and  they  trav- 
elled by  sea  and  went  to  Cyprus.    (40)  But  Paul  40 
chose  Silas  for  his  companion,  and  departed,  being 
commended  by  the  brethren  to  the  grace  of  Go<E 
(41)  And  he  travelled  through  Syria,  and  through  41 
Oilicia,  and  strengthened  the  churches. 


*  This  verse  is  removed  to  the  margin  in  the  editions  of  the  British  and  Foreign 
Bible  Sodety. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XVL 


247 


XVI.  And  he  came  t6  the  city  Derbe,  and  to  Lystra. 
And  there  was  a  certain  disciple  there,  whose  name 
was  Timothy,  the  son  of  a  believing  Jewess,  but  his 
2  father  was  a  Gentile. «^  J^^  And  all  the  disciples  of 
Lystra  ana  iconmm  gave  good  testimony  of  him. 
8  (3)  Him  Paul  was  disposed  to  take  with  him :  and 
he  took  him,  and  circumcised  him,  because  of  the 
Jews  that  were  in  that  region ;  for  they  all  knew 

4  that  his  father  was  a  Gentile.  (4)  And  as  they 
went  among  the  cities,  they  preached  and  taught 
them,  that  they  should  observe  those  injunctions 
which  the  legates  and  Elders  at  Jerusalem  had 

5  written.  (5)  And  so  were  the  churches  established 
in  the  faith,  and  were  increased  in  number  daily. 

6  (6)  And  they  travelled  through  the  regions  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  forbid 

7  them  to  speak  the  word  of  God  in  Asia.  (7)  And 
when  they  came  into  the  region  of  Mvsia,  they 
were  disposed  to  go  from  there  into  Bithynia,  but 

8  the  Spirit  of  Jesus  permitted  them  not.— (8)  And 
when  they  departed  from  Mysia,  they  came  down 

9  to  the  region  of  Troas.  (9)  And  in  a  vision  of  the 
night,  there  appeared  unto  Paul,  a  man  of  Mace- 
donia, who  stood  and  besought  him,  saying:  Come 

10  to  Macedonia  and  help  us. — (10)  And  when  Paul 
had  seen  this  vision,  immediately  we  were  desirous 
to  depart  for  Macedonia ;  because  we  inferred,  that 
our  Lord  called  us  to  preach  to  them. 

11  And  we  sailed  from  Troas,  and  came  direct  to 
Samothrace ;  and  from  there,  on  the  following  day, 

12  we  came  to  the  city  Neapoli^.  (12)  And  from 
there  to  Philippi,  which  is  the  chiefs  [city]  of 
Macedonia,  and  is  a  colony.     And  we  remained  in 

IS  that  city  certain  days.  (18)  And  on  the  sabbath 
day,  we  went  without  the  gate  of  the  city  to  the 
siae  of  a  river,  because  a  house  of  prayer  was  seen 
there.     And  when  we  were  seated,  we  conversed 

14  with  the  women  who  there  assembled.  (14)  And 
a  certain  woman  who  feared  God,  a  seller  of  pur- 
ple, whose  name  was  Lydia,  from  the  city  of  Thy- 
atira,  [was  there].     Her  heart  our  Lord  opened- 

15  and  she  hearkened  to  what  Paul  spake.  (15)  And 
she  was  baptized,  and  her  household.<^     And  she 

16  entreated  us,  saying:  If  ye  are  really  persuaded 
that  I  have  believed  in  our  Lord,  come  and  take 
lodging  in  my  house.     And  she  urged  us  much. — 

Digitized  by 


»  Sy.  Vil05) 

or,  Aramaean. 


"^Sy.ljL^i 


•  Sy. 


Google 


248 


ACTS,    XYl. 


^  Sy.  divined. 


'  or,  salvcUioK, 


'Sy. 
Gr.  ifTparriyoi. 


*  or,  be  saved. 
^  or,  be  saved. 


17 


18 


20 


21 


(16)  And  it  occurred  that,  as  we  were  going  to  the  16 
house  of  prayer,  a  certain  maid  met  us,  who  had 

a  spirit  of  divination,  and  who  procured  for  her  lords 
great  gain  by  the  divination  which  she  performed.*^ 

(17)  And  she  followed  after  Paul  and  us,  and  cried, 
saving:  These  men  are  the  servants  of  the  Most 
High  God,  and  they  announce  to  you  the  way  of 
life®  (18)  And  this  she  did  many  days.  And 
Paul  was  indignant ;  and  he  said  to  that  spirit,  I 
command  thee,  in  the  name  of  Jesus  Messiah,  that 
thou  come  out  of  her.  And  it  came  out  the  same 
hour.  (19)  And  when  her  lords  saw  that  the  pros-  19 
pect  of  their  gain  from  her  was  gone,  thev  seized 
Paul  and  Silas,  and  dragging  them  along  brought 
them  to  the  market-place,  (20)  and  set  them  before 
the  prefects^  and  chiefs  of  the  city,  and  said :  These 
men  disturb  our  city ;  for  they  are  Jews,  (21)  and 
they  preach  to  us  customs,  which  it  is  not  lawful 
for  us  to  receive  and  to  practise,  because  we  are 
Romans.  (22)  And  a  great  company  was  collected  22 
against  them.  Then  the  prefects  rent  their  gar- 
ments, and  commanded  to  scourge  them.  (23)  And  23 
when  they  had  scourged  them  much,  they  cast  them 
into  the  prisdh,  and  commanded  the  keeper  of  the 
prison  to  keep  them  with  care.  (24)  And  he,  hav-  24 
ing  received  this  command,  carried  and  immured 
them  in  the  inner  part  of  the  prison,  and  confined 
their  feet  in  the  stocks.  (25)  And  at  midnight  25 
Paul  and  Silas  were  praying  and  glorifying  God : 
and  the  prisoners  heard  them.  (26)  And  suddenly  26 
there  was  a  great  shaking,  and  the  foundations  of 
the  prison  were  moved ;  and  at  once  all  the  doors 
opened,  and  the  bands  of  all  were  loosed.  (27)  And  27 
when  the  keeper  of  the  prison  awoke,  and  saw  that 
the  doors  of  the  prison  were  open,  he  took  a  sword 
and  sought  to  kill  himself;  oecause  he  supposed 
the  prisoners  had  escaped.  (28)  But  Paul  called 
to  hmi,  in  a  loud  voice,  and  said :  Do  thyself  no 
harm,  for  we  are  all  here.  (29^)  And  he  lighted  for  29 
himself  a  lamp,  and  sprang  ana  came  in,  trembling, 
and  fell  at  the  feet  of  Paul  and  Silas.  (30)  And 
he  brought  them  out,  and  said  to  them :  My  lords, 
what  must  I  do,  that  I  may  have  life?&  (31)  And 
they  said  to  him:  Believe  on  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  and  thou  wilt  have  life,*»  thou  and 
thy  house.    (32)  And  they  spoke  the  word  of  the 


28 


30 
31 


32 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XVIL 


249 


Lord  to  him,  and  to  all  the  members^  of  his  house,  t  Sy.  tom. 
83  (83)  And  the  same  hour  of  the  night,  he  took  and 
washed  them  from  their  stripes ;  and  he  was  ba^ 
tized  immediately,  he  and  all  the  members^  of  his  ^  Sy.  tons. 

34  house.  (84)  And  he  took  them  and  brought  them 
into  his  house,  and  set  a  table  for  them ;  and  he  re- 
joiced in  the  faith  of  God,  he  and  all  the  members^  '  Sy.  sons. 

35  of  his  house. — (85)  And  when  it  was  morning,  the 
prefects  sent  rod-bearers™  to  say  to  the  superior**  of  "  i«  ©•  lictan. 

36  the  prison :  Let  those  men  loose.    (36)  And  when  ■  Sy.  *o5 
the  superior  of  the  prison  heard  [it],  he  went  in, 
and  said  the  same  things  to  Paul ;  [namely],  that  •  or,  vxfnL 
the  prefects  have  sent  Tword]  that  ye  be  set  free. 
And  now,  [said  he,]  Qo  ye  out,  and  depart  in 

37  peace.  (87)  But  Paul  said  to  him:  They  have 
scourged  us,  unoffending  men,  and  Romans,  before 
all  the  world,  and  have  cast  us  into  prison;  and 
now,  do  they  secretly  let  us  out?  No,  surely: 
but  let  them  come  themselves  and  bring  us  out. 

38  (38)  And  the  rod-bearers  went  and  told  to  the  pre- 
fects the  words  which  were  told  to  them:  and 
when  they  heard  that  they  were  Eomans,  they 

39  were  afraid,  (39)  and  came  to  them,  and  entreated 
of  them  that  they  would  come  out^  and  that  they 

40  would  leave  the  city.  (40)  And  when  they  came 
out  from  the  prison,  they  entered  the  house  of 
Lydia ;  and  there  they  saw  the  brethren,  and  com- 
forted them,  and  departed. 

XVIL  And  thev  passed  through  the  cities  of  Am- 
phipolis  and  ApoUonia,  and  came  to  Thessalonica, 

2  where  was  a  synagogue  of  the  Jews.  (2)  And 
Paul,  as  was  his  ctistom,  went  in  to  them;  and 
during  three  sabbaths  he  discoursed  with  them 

3  from  the  scriptures ;  (8)  expounding  and  showing, 
that  the  Messiah  was  to  suffer,  and  to  arise  from  the 
dead,  and  that  this  Jesus  whom  I  announce  to  you 

4  is  the  Messiah.  (4)  And  some  of  them  believed, 
and  adhered  to  Paul  and  Silas ;  and  of  those  Greeks 
who  feared  God,  a'  great  many ;  and  also  of  noted 

5  women,  not  a  few.  (5)  But  the  Jews  were  indig- 
nant, and  gathered  to  themselves  evil  men  from  the 
market-place  of  the  city,  and  formed  a  great  mob ; 
and  they  alarmed  the  city,  and  came  and  assaulted 
the  house  of  Jason,  and  sought  to  draw  them  from 

6  it,  and  to  deliver  them  up  to  the  mob.    (6)  And 


Digitized  by 


Google 


260 


ACTS,   XVII. 


ingenuous. 


^  By.  made  bit-' 


^  Qy.  collector  of 
tDords, 

'  Sy.  lofl^, 
gods. 


when  they  found  them  not  there,  they  drew  Jason 
and  the  brethren  who  were  there,  and  brought 
them  before  the  chiefs  of  the  city,  crying  out:    ' 
These  are  they  who  have  terrified  all  the  country ; 
and  lo,  they  have  come  hither  also:  (7)  and  this     1 
Jason  is  their  entertainer :  and  they  all  resist  the 
commands  of  Csesar,  saying  that  there  is  another 
king,  one  Jesus.     (8)  And  the  chiefe  of  the  city,     8 
and  all  the  people,  were  alarmed  when  they  heard 
these  things.     (9)  And  they  took  sureties  from     9 
Jason,  and  also  from  the  brethren,  and  then  re- 
leased them.— (10)  And  the  brethren  immediately,  10 
on  the  same  night,  sent  away  Paul  and  Silas  to  the 
city  of  Berea.     And  when  they  came  there,  they 
entered  into  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews.     (11)  For  11 
the  Jews  there  were  more  Jiberal^ than  the  Jews 
of  Thessalonica ;  and  they  gladlyheard  the  word 
from  them  daily,  and  searched  from  the  scriptures 
whether  these  things  were  so.    (12)  And  many  of  12 
them  believed;   and  so  likewise  of  the  Greeks, 
many  men,  and  women  of  note.     (18)  And  when  13 
the  Jews  of  Thessalonica  had  knowledge  that  the 
word  of  God  was  preached  by  Paul  in  the  city  of 
Berea,  they  came  thither  also,  and  they  ceased  not 
to  excite  and  alarm  the  people.     (14)  And  the  14 
brethren  sent  away  Paul,  that  he  might  go  down 
to  the  sea.     But  Silas  and  Timothy  abode  in  that 
city. 

And  they  who  conducted  Paul,  went  with  him  15 
to  the  city  of  Athens.  And  when  they  departed 
from  him,  they  received  an  epistle  from  him  to 
Silas  and  Timothy,  that  they  should  come  to  him 
speedily.  (16)  And  while  raul  was  waiting  [for  16 
them]  at  Athens,  he  was  pained*»  in  his  spirit;  be- 
cause he  saw  that  the  whole  city  was  fiill  of  idols. 

(17)  And  in  the  synagogue  he  spoke  with  the  Jews,  17 
ana  with  those  that  feared  God,  and  in  the  mar- 
ket-place with  them  who  daily  assembled  there. 

(18)  And  also  philosophers  of  the  sect  of  Epicure-  18 
ans,  and  others  who  were  called  Stoics,  disputed 
with  him.  And  one  and  another  of  them  said: 
What  doth  this  word-monger ^  mean?  Others 
said:  He  announceth  foreign  deities ;<^  because  he 
preached    to    them   Jesus   ana    his    resurrection. 

(19)  And  they  took  him  and  brought  him  to  the  19 
place  of  judgments  called  Areopagus,  and  said  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XVIL 


261 


or,  a  saiiL 

4) 


him :  May  we  know  what  this  new  doctrine  which 

20  thou  preachest  is?    (20)  For  thou  scatterest®  in  •Sy.sowest. 
our  ears  strange  words;   and  we  wish  to  know 

21  what  they  are.  (21)  For  all  the  Athenians  and 
the  foreigners  residing  there,  cared  for  nothing  else 

22  but  to  tell  or  to  hear  something  new. — (22)  And 
as  Paul  stood  in  the  Areopagus,  he  said:  Men, 
Athenians,  I  perceive  that  in  all  things  ye  are  ex- 

23  cessive  in  the  worship  of  demons.  (23)  For,  as  I 
was  rambling  about,  and  viewing  the  temples  of 
your  worship,  I  met  with  an  altar,  on  which  was 
inscribed.  To  the  hidden  God.  Him,  therefore, 
whom  ye  worship  while  ye  know  him  not,  the 

24  very  same  I  announce  to  you.  (24)  For  the  God 
who  made  the  world  and  all  that  is  in  it,  and  who 
is  Lord  of  heaven  and  of  earth,  dwelleth  not  in 

25  temples  made  with  hands.  (25)  Nor  is  he  minis- 
tered 4o  by  human  hands,  neither  hath  he  any 
wants ;  for  he  it  is  giveth  life  and  breath  ^  to  every 

26  man.  (26)  And  of  one  blood  hath  he  made  the 
whole  world  of  men,  that  they  might  dwell  on  the 
face  of  all  the  earth:  and  he  hath  separated  the 
seasons  by  his  ordinance ;  and  hath  set  bounds  to 

27  the  residence  of  men :  (27)  that  they  might  inquire 
and  search  after  God,  and,  by  means  of  his  crea- 
tions, might  find  him;  because  he  is  not  afar  off 

28  from  each  one  of  us :  (28)  for  in  him  it  is  we  live, 
and  move,  and  exist :  as  one  of  your  own  wise  men 

29  hath  said :  From  him  is  our  descent.  (29)  There- 
fore we,  whose  descent  is  from  God,  ought  not  to 
suppose  that  the  Deity?  hath  the  likeness  of  gold, 
or  silver,  or  stone,  sculptured  by  the  art  and  skill 

30  of  men.  (30)  And  the  times  of  this  error  God  hath 
made  to  pass  away ;  and  at  the  present  time,  he 
commandeth  all  men,  that  each  individual,  in  every 

81  place,  should  repent.  (31)  Because  he  hath  appoint- 
ed a  day,  in  which  he  will  judge  all  the  eartn,  with 
righteousness,  by  the  man  whom  he  nath  designa- 
ted: and  he  turneth  every  man  to  faith  in  him,  in 

82  that  he  raised  him  from  the  dead. — (32)  And  when 
they  heard  of  the  resurrection  from  the  dead,  some 
of  them  ridiculed,  and  others  of  them  said:  At 
another  time,  we  will  hear  thee  on  this  matter. 

83  (SS)   And  so  Paul   departed  from   among  them. 

84  (34)  And  some  of  them  adhered  to  him,  and  be- 
lieved: one  of  these  was  Dionvsius  from  among 


Sy.UooOi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


262 


ACTS,    XVIIL 


'  Sy.  son  of 
their  trade. 


^  Sy .  the  pro- 
fane. 


<^  Gr.  Justus. 
<»  Sy.  ^5 

«  SV.  S071S. 


*Sy. 
Or.  dv^u^taro^, 


the  judges  of  Areopagus,  and  a  woman  named 
Damaris,  and  others  with  them. 

And  when  Paul  departed  from  Athens,  he  XV  HI. 
went  to  Corinth.     (2)  And  he  found  there  a  man,  a    2 
Jew,  whose  name  was  Aquila,  who  was  from  the  re- 
gion of  Pontus,  and  had  just  then  arrived  from  the 
country  of  Italy,  he  and  Priscilla  his  wife,  because 
Claudius  Caesar  had  commanded  that  all  Jews 
should  depart  from  Eome.    And  he  went  to  them ; 
(3)  and,  because  he  was  of*  their  trade,  he  took    8 
loagings  with  them,  and  worked  with  them;  for 
by  their  trade  they  were  tent-makers.    (4)  And  he    4 
spoke  in  the  synagogue  every  sabbath,  and  persua- 
d!ed  the  Jews  and  Gentiles.  ^     (5)  And  when  Silas    6 
and  Timothy  had  come  from  Macedonia,  Paul  was 
impeded  in  discourse,  because  the  Jews  stood  up 
against  him,  and  reviled,  as  he  testified  to  them 
that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah.     (6)  And  he  shook  his    6 
garments,  and  said  to  them:   Henceforth  I  am 
olefin ;  I  betake  myself  to  the  Gentiles.     {7j  And    7 
he  went  away,  and  entered  into  the  house  oi  a  cer- 
tain man  named  Titus,  <^  one  who  feared  God,  and 
whose  house  adjoined  the  synagogue.     (8)   And    8 
Crispus,  the  president^  of  the  synagogue,  believed 
on  our  Lord,  ne  and  all  the  members®  of  his  house. 
And  many  Corinthians  gave  ear,  and  believed  in 
God,  and  were  baptized.     (9)  And  the  Lord  said    9 
to  Paul  in  a  vision :  Fear  not,  but  speak  and  be 
not  silent :  (10)  for  I  am  with  thee,  and  no  one  is  10 
able  to  harm  thee;    and  I  have  much  people  in 
this  city.     (11)  And  he  resided  in  Corinth  a  year  11 
and  six  months,  and  taught  them  the  word  of 
God. 

And  when  Gallio  was  proconsuF  of  Achaia,  the  12 
Jews  assembled  together  against  Paul;  and  they 
brought  him  before  the  judgment-seat,  (18)  saying:  18 
This  man  persuadeth  the  people  to  worship  God 
contrary  to  the  law.     (14)   And  when  Paul  re-  14 
quested  that  he  might  open  his  mouth  and  speak, 
Gallio  said  to  the  Jews :  If  your  accusation,  O  Jews, 
related  to  any  wrong  done,  or  any  fraud,  or  base 
act,  I  would  listen  to  you  suitably.    (15)  But  if  the  15 
contests  are  about  words,  and  about  names,  and 
concerning  your  law,  ye  must  see  to  it  among 
yourselves,  lor  I  am  not  disposed  to  be  a  judge  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XIX. 


253 


16  such  matters,    (16)   And  he  repelled  them  from 

17  his  judgment-seat.  (17)  And  all  the  Gentilesg 
laid  hold  of  Sosthenes  an  Elder^  of  tne  synagogue, 
and  smote  him  before  the  judgment-seat.  And 
Gallio  disregarded  these  things. 

18  And  when  Paul  had  been  there  many  days,  he 
bid  adieu  to  the  brethren,  and  departed  by  sea  to 
go  to  Syria.  And  with  him  went  Priscilla  and 
Aquila,  when  he  had  shaved  his  head  at  Cenchrea, 

19  because  he  had  vowed  a  vow. — (19)  And  they  came 
to  Ephesus;  and  Paul  entered  the  synagogue,  and 

20  discoursed  with  the  Jews.  (20)  And  they  reauested 
him  to  tarry  with  them  :  but  he  could  not  oe  per- 

21  suaded.  (21)  For  he  said :  I  must  certainly  keep 
the  approaching  feast  at  Jerusalem.      But,  if  it 

22  please  God,  I  will  come  again  to  you.  (22)  And 
Aquila  and  Priscilla  he  left  at  Ephesus,  and  he 
himself  proceeded  by  sea  and  came  to  Caesarea. 
And  he  went  up  and  saluted  the  members*  of  the 

23  church,  and  went  on  to  Antioch. — (23)  And  when 
he  had  been  there  some  days,  he  departed,  and 
travelled  from  place  to  place  in  the  regions  of 
Phrygia  and  Galatia,  establislung  all  the  disciples. 

24  And  a  certain  man  named  Apollos,  a  Jew,  a  na- 
tive of  Alexandria,  who  was  trained  to  eloquence, 
and  well  taught  in  the  scriptures,  came  to  Ephesus. 

25  (25)  He  had  been  instructed  m  the  ways  of  the 
Lord,  and  was  fervent  in  spirit ;  and  he  discoursed 
and  taught  fully  respecting  Jesus,  while  yet  he 

26  knew  nothing  except  the  baptism  of  John.  (26)  And 
he  began  to  speak  boldly  in  the  synagogue.  And 
when  Aquila  and  Priscilla  heard  him,  they  took  him 
to  their  house,  and  fully  showed  him  the  way  of  the 

27  Lord.  (27)  And  when  he  was  disposed  to  go  to 
Achaia,  the  brethren  anticipated  him,  and  wrote 
to  the  disciples  to  receive  him.  And,  by  going, 
through  grace,  he  greatly  assisted  all  them  that  be- 

28  lieved.  (28)  For  he  reasoned  powerfully  against 
the  Jews,  before  the  congregation;  and  showed 
from  the  scriptures,  respecting  Jesus,  that  he  is  the 
Messiah. 

XIX.    And  while  Apollos  was  at  Corinth,  Paul  trav- 
elled over  the  upper  countries  to  Ephesus.     And 
he  inquired  of  the  disciples  whom  he  found  there, 
2  (2)  Have  ye  received  the  Holy  Spirit,  since  ye  be- 


V 


Jam,  -^f)  . :.'   '/>, 


Sy.  iont 


Digitized  by 


Google 


254 


> 


•Sy. 
Aramaearu. 


'Sy. 

d  Sy.  ^COfiO 
•  Sy.  oJ 


Sy. 


ACTS.   XIX. 

lieved?  Thej  answered  and  said  to  him:  K  there 
be  a  Holy  Spirit,  it  hath  not  come  to  our  hearing. 
(8)  He  said  to  them :  Into  what  then  were  ye  bap- 
tized? They  say:  Into  the  baptism  of  John. 
(4)  Paul  said  to  them :  John  baptized  the  people 
with  the  baptism  of  repentance,  while  he  told  them 
to  believe  in  him  who  was  to  come  after  him,  that 
is,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (5)  And  when  they  heard 
these  things,  they  were  baptized  in  the  name  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.  (6)  And  Paul  laid  [his] 
hand  on  them;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  came  upon 
them,  and  they  spoke  in  various  tongues,  and  pro- 
phesied. (7)  And  all  the  persons  were  twelve. — 
(8)  And  Paul  entered  into  the  sjnagogue,  and 
spoke  boldly  three  months,  persuading  in  regard  to 
the  kingdom  of  God.  (9)  And  some  of  them  were 
hardened,  and  disputatious,  and  reviled  the  way  of 
God  before  the  assembly  of  the  people.  Then 
Paul  withdrew  himself,  and  separated  the  disciples 
jfrom  them.  And  he  discoursed  with  them  daily 
in  the  school  of  a  man  named  Tyrannus.  (10)  And  10 
this  continued  for  two  years,  until  all  who  resided 
in  [Proconsular]  Asia,  both  Jews  and  Gentiles^  ^  _ 
heard  the  word  of  the  Lord,  (il)  And  iioa  11 
wrought  very  great  miracles**  by  the  hand  of  Paul : 
(12^  so  that,  from  the  clothes  on  his  body,  napkins  12 
a 


6 


an< 


rags  were  carried  and  laid  upon  the  sick,  and 
the  diseases  left  them,  and  demons  also  went  out. 
— (18)  And  moreover  certain  Jews,  who  went 
about  exorcisingc  demons,  were  disposed  to  exor- 
cise in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  over  those  who 
had  unclean  spirits,  by  saying:  We  adjure  you,  in 
the  name  of  that  Jesus  whom  Paul  announceth. 
(14)  And  there  were  seven  sons  of  one  Sceva,^  a 
Jew,  and  chiefs  of  the  priests,  who  did  this.  (15) 
And  the  evil  demon  answered  and  said  to  them : 
Jesus  I  well  know,  and  Paul  I  know,  but  as  for 
you,  whp  are  ye?  (16)  And  the  man  in  whom 
was  the  evil  demon  leaped  upon  them,  and  over- 
powered them,  and  threw  them  down :  and  they 
fled  out  of  the  house  denuded  and  bruised.  (17) 
And  this  became  known  to  all  the  Jews  and  Gen- 
tiles/ who  resided  at  Ephesus.  And  fear  tell  on 
'thSm  all,  and  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah 
was  exalted. — (18)  And  many  of  them  that  be- 
lieved, came  and  narrated  their  faults,  and  confess- 


13 


14 
15 


16 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XIX. 


255 


19  ed  what  they  had  done.  (19)  And  also  many  ma- 
gicians collected  their  books,  and  brought  and 
bxumed  them  before  everjr  body :  and  they  compu- 
ted the  cost  of  them,  and  it  amounted  to  fifty  thou- 

20  sand  [pieces]  of  silver.  (20^  And  thus  with  great 
power  was  the  faith  of  Goa  strengthened  and  in- 
creased. 

21  And  when  these  things  had  been  accomplished, 
Paul  purposed  in  his  mind,  to  make  the  circuit  of 
all  Macedonia  and  Achaia,  and  [then]  go  to  Jeru- 

<     salem.    And  he  said :  After  I  have  gone  thither,  I 

22  must  also  see  Eome.  (22)  And  he  sent  two  per- 
sons, of  those  that  ministered  to  him,  Timothy  and 
Erastus,?  into  Macedonia;  but  he  himself  remained 

23  for  a  time  in  Asia.-=-(23)  And  at  that  time  there 
was  great  commotion  respecting  the  way  of  God. 

24  ^)  For  a  certain  silversmith  was  there,*  named 
Demetrius,  who  made  silver  shrines  for  Diana,  and 
afforded  great  profits  to  the  artisans**  of  his  trade. 

25  (25)  He  assembled  all  the  artisans  of  his  trade, 
ana  those  who  labored  with  them,  and  said  to  them : 
Gentlemen,*  ye  know  that  our  gains  are  all  from 

26  this  manufacture.  (26)  And  ye  also  know  and  see, 
that  not  only  the  citizens^  pf  Ephesus,  but  also  the 
mass  of  all  Asia,  this  Paul  hath  persuaded  and  en- 
ticed away,  by  saying,  that  those  are  not  gods, 

27  which  are  made  by  the  hands  of  men.  (27)  And 
not  only  is  this  occupation  slandered  and  impeded, 
but  also  the  temple  of  the  great  goddess*  Diana  is 
accounted  as  nothing;  and  likewise  the  goddess 
herself  of  all  Asia,  and  whom  all  nations  worship, 

28  is  contemned. — (28)  And  when  they  heard  these 
things  they  were  filled  with  wrath ;  and  they  cried 
out,  and  said:  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephesians, 
(29)  And  the  whole  city  was  in  commotion ;  and 
they  ran  together,  and  entered  the  theatre.  And 
they  caught,  and  bore  along  with  them.  Gains  and 
Anstarchus,  men  of  Macedonia,  and  associates  of 
Paul.  (30)  And  Paul  was  disposed  to  go  into  the 
theatre :  but  the  disciples  restrained  him.  (81)  And 
likewise  the  chiefs"*  of  Asia,  because  they  were  his 
friends,  sent  and  requested  of  him,  that  he  would 
not  expose  himself  by  going  into  the  theatre. 

82  (82)  And  the  multitudes  that  were  in  the  theatre 
were  in  great  confusion,  and  cried,  some  one  thing, 
and  some  another:  and  many  of  them  knew  not 


29 


80 
81 


«  Sy.  Aristus. 


Sy 


Sy.  Jtfen. 
Sy.  sons. 


Sy.l2ai!& 


Sy.U^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


266 


ACTS,   XX, 


Sy.Va-«3 


»Sy.  Ia^OJLS 


'  Sy.^AJLD 


for  what  cause  they  had  come  together.    (33)  And  88 
the  Jewish  people  who  were  there,  brought  for- 
ward one  of  their  men,  a  Jew,  named  Alexander. 
And  he,  rising  up,  waved  his  hand,  and  wished  to 
make  a  defence  before  the  people.     (34)  But  they,  84 
knowing  him  to  be  a  Jew,  aU  cried  out  with  one 
voice,  about  two  hours :  Great  is  Diana  of  the  Ephe- 
sians.    (35)  But  the  chief*  of  the  city  tranquillized  85 
them,  by  saying :  Men  of  Ephesus,  What  person 
is  there,  among  mei^,  who  doth  not  know  the  city 
of  the  Ephesians  to  be  devoted  to  the  worship  of     - 
the  great  Diana,  and  of  her  image  that  descended 
from  heaven?    (36)   Since  therefore  no  one  can  36 
gainsay  this,  ye  ought  to  be  tranquil,  and  to  do 
nothing  with   precipitancy.    *(37)   For   ye    have  87 
brought  forward  these  men,  when  they  have  robbed 
no  temples,  and  have  not  reviled  our  goddess. 
(88)  But  if  Demetrius  and  the  men  of  Ins  trade  88 
have  a  controversy  with  any  one,  lo,  there  is  a  pro- 
consul in  the  city,  they  are  men  of  dexterity,  let 
them   approach   and  litigate  with   one    another. 
(39)  Or  if  you  desire  any  other  thing,  it  may  be  39 
aetermined  in  the  place  assigned  by  law  for  an  aa- 
sembly.o    (40)  Because  too  we  are  now  in  danger  40 
of  being  accused  as  seditious,  since  we  cannot  give 
a  reason  for  the  meeting  of  this  day,  because  we 
have  assembled  needlessly,  and  been  tumultuous 
without  a  cause.     And  having  said  these  things, 
he  dismissed  the  assembly.? 

And  after  the  tumult  had  subsided,  Paul  called  XX. 
the  disciples   to  him,  and  comforted  them,  and 
kissed  them,  and  departed,  and  went  into  Mace- 
donia.    (2)  And  when  he  had  travelled  over  those    2 
regions,  and  had  comforted  them  with  many  dis- 
courses, he  proceeded  to  the  country  of  Greece. 
(3)   And  he  was  there  three  months.     And  the    3 
J  ews  formed  a  plot  against  him,  when  he  was  about 
to  go  to  Syria:  and  he  contemplated  returning  to 
Macedonia.     (4)  And  there  departed  with  him,  as    4 
far  as  Asia,  Sopater  of  the  city  Berea,  and  Aristar- 
chus  and  Secundus  who  were  of  Thessalonica,  and 
Gains  who  was  of  the  city  of  Derbe,  and  Timothy 
of  Lystra,  and  of  Asia  Tychicus  and  Trophimus. 
(5)  These  proceeded  on  before  us,  and  waited  for    5 
us  at  Troas.     (6)  And  we  departed  fix)m  Philippi,     6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XX. 


267 


a  dty  of  the  Macedonians,  after  the  days  of  uiileav- 
enecf  bread ;  and  proceeded  by  water  and  arrived 
at  Troas  in  five  days,  and  remained  there  seven 
days.— (7)  And  on  the  first  day  of  the,  week.  when| 
jjgjgseinbled 


to 
them, 


th$  eycharist,^  Paul  dis- 
ecause  he  was  to  depart  the 


coursed  with 

next  day ;  and  he  continued  his  discourse  till  mid 

8  night.   (S)  And  there  were  many  lamps  burning  in 

9  the  chamoer  where  we  were  assembled.  (9)  And 
a  young  man  named  Eutvchus  was  sitting  in  a  win- 
dow and  listening.  And  while  Paul  prolonged  his 
discourse,  he  sunk  into  a  deep  sleep ;  and,  in  his 
sleep,  he  fell  firom  the  third  loft,  and  was  taken  up 

10  as  aead.  (10)  And  Paul  went  down,  and  bent 
over  him   and  embraced  him,  and  said:   Be  not 

11  agitated,  for  his  soul*>  is  in  him.  (11)  And  when 
he  had  gone  up,  he  broke  the  bread  and  tasted  [it], 
and  discoursed  until  the  morning  dawned.     And 

12  then  he  departed  to  go  by  land.  (12)  And  they 
brought  the  young  man  alive,  and  rejoiced  over 

13  him  greatly.— (18)  And  we  went  on  board  the  ship, 
and  sailed  to  the  port  of  Thesos;®  because,  there 

•    we  were  to  take  in  Paul :  for  so  had  he  bidden  us, 

14  when  he  proceeded  on  by  land.  (14)  And  when 
we  had  received  him  at  Thesos,  we  took  him  on 

15  board  ship  and  proceeded  to  Mitylene.  (15)  And 
fix)m  there,  the  next  day,  we  sailed  over  against 
the  island  Chios ;  and  again,  the  next  day  we  ar- 
rived at  Samos,  and  stopped  at  Trogyllium ;  and 

16  onthefollowingday  we  arrived  at  Miletus.  (16)For 
Paul  had  determined  with  himself  to  pass  by  feph- 
esus,  lest  he  should  be  delayed  there ;  because  he 
hasted  on,  if  possible,  to  keep  the  day  of  pentecost 
in  Jerusalem. 

17  And  from  Miletus,  he  sent  and  called  the  Elders^ 

18  of  the  church®  at  Ephesus.  (18)  And  when  they 
had  come  to  him,  he  said  to  them :  Ye  yourselves 
know,  how,  at  all  times,  since  the  first  day  that  I 

19  entered  Asia,  I  have  been  with  you ;  (19)  laboring 
for  God,  in  great  humility,^  and  with  tears,  amid 
the  trials  which  beset  me  from  the  plottings  of 

20  Jews :  (20)  and  I  shunned  not  that  which  was  ad- 
vantageous to  your  souls,  that  I  might  preach  to 

21  you,  and  teach  in  the  streets  and  in  houses,  (21) 
while  I  testified  to  Jews  and  to  Gentiles,  8^  as  to 
repentance  towards  God  and  faith  in  our  Lord  Je 


Sy. 


Sy  CV^^^) 


«  Or.  AttM, 


''Sy.]a'ian 
or,  depresmoft 


»Sy. 
Aramaeans 


Digitized  by 


Google 


258 


ACTS,   XX. 


'  Sy.  ^ZiX^ID 


^  In  the  Neato- 
rian  MSS., 
Messiah, 


25 


26 


sua  Messiah.     (22)  And  now  I  am  bound  in  spirit^  22 
and  I  go  to  Jerusalem ;  and  I  know  not  what  will 
befall  me  there ;  (28)  except  that  the  Holy  Spirit,  23 
in   every  city,  testifieth  tome  and  saith:   Bonds 
and  afflictions  await  thee.     (24)  But  my  life  is  ac-  24 
counted  by  me  as  nothing,  so  that  I  may  but  finish 
my  course,  and  the  ministration  which  I  have  re- 
ceived from  our  Lord  Jesus,  to  bear  testimony  to 
the  gospel**  of  the  grace  of  Ghod.    (25)  And  now,  I 
know  that  ye  will  see  my  fece  no  more,  all  of  you 
among  whom  I  have  travelled  and  preached  the 
kingdom  of  God.     (26)  I  therefore  protest  to  you, 
this  day,  that  I  am  pure  from  the  blood  of  you  all. 
(27)  For  I  have  not  shunned  to  acquaint  you  with  27 
all  the  will  of  God.    (28)  Take  heed  therefore  to  28 
ourselves,  and  to  all  the  nock  over  which  the  Holy 
jpirit  hath  established  you  bishops;**  that  ye  feed 
the  church  of  God,^  which  he  hath  acquired  by  his 
blood.     (29)  For  I  know,  that  after  I  am  gone, 
fierce  wolves  will  come  in  among  you,  and  will 
have  no  mercy  on  the  flock.     (30)  And  also,  from  30 
among  yourselves,  there  will  rise  up  men  speaking 
perverse  things,  that  they  may  turn  away  the  dis- 
ciples to  go  after  them.    (31)  Therefore  be  ye  vigi- 
lant; and  remember,  that  for  three  years  1  ceased 
not  to  admonish  each  one  of  you,  by  day  and  by 
night,  with  tears.     (32)  And  now  I  commend  you  32 
to  God,  and  to.  the  word  of  his  grace,  which  is  able 
to  build  you  up,  ^nd  to  give  you  an  inheritance 
among  all  the  saints.     (33)  Silver,  or  gold,  or  gar-  38 
ments,  I  have  not  coveted.    (34)  And  ye  yourselves  34 
know,  that  these  hands  ministered  to  my  wants, 
and  to  them  that  were  with  me.     (35)  And  I  have 
showed  you  all  things ;  that  thus  it  is  a  duty  to 
labor,  and  to  care  for  the  infirm,  and  to  remember 
the  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus ;   for  he  hath  said, 
That  he  is  more  blessed  who  giveth,  than  he  who 
receiveth.— (36)  And  when  he  had  said  these  things,  86 
he  fell  on  his  knees  and  prayed,  and  all  the  people 
with   him.      (37)   And  there  was  great  weepmg 
among  them  all.     And  they  embraced  him,  ana 
kissed  him.    {38)  And  they  had  the  most  anguish, 
because  of  the  word  he  uttered,  that  they  would  see 


29 


31 


35 


87 


*  This  18  the  onlj  place  in  this  version  of  the  New  Testament  in  which  tlie 
word  Bishop  occurs. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XXL 


his  &ce  no  more, 
the  ship. 


And  thej  accompanied  him  to 


XXI.  And  we  separated  from  them,  and  proceeded  in 
a  straight  course  to  the  island  of  Coos :  and  the  next 
day,  we  reached  Ehodes,  and  from  there  Patara. 

2  (2)  And  we  found  there  a  ship  going  to  Phenicia; 

8  and  we  entered  it,  and  proceeded  on.  (3)  And  we 
came  up  with  the  island  of  Cyprus,  and  leaving  it 
on  the  left  we  came  to  Syria ;  and  from  there  we 
went  to  Tyre,  for.  there  tne  ship  was  to  discharge 

4  her  cargo.  (4)  And,  as  we  found  disciples  there, 
we  tarried  with  them  seven  days :  and  tney,  by  the 

5  Sjpirit,  told  Paul  not  to  go  to  Jerusalem.  (5)  And 
after  those  days,  we  departed  and  went  on  [our] 
way ;  and  they  all  clung  to  us,  they  and  their  wives 
and  their  children,  until  [we  were]  without  the 
city ;  and  they  fell  on  their  knees  by  the  seaside, 

6  and  prayed.  (6)  And  we  kissed  one  another :  and 
we  embarked  in  the  ship,  and  they  returned  to  their 

7  homes. — (7)  And  we  sailed  from  Tyre,  and  arrived 
at  the  city  Acco;*  and  we  saluted  the  brethren 

8  there,  and  stopped  with  them  one  day.  (8)  And 
the  next  day,  we  departed  and  came  to  Csesarea ; 
and  we  went  in  and  put  up  in  the  house  of  Philip 

9  the  Evangelist,**  who  was  one  of  the  seven.  (9)  He 
had  four  virgin  daughters,  who  were  prophetesses. 

10  (10)  And  as  we  were  there  many  days,  a  certain 
prophet  came  down  from  Judasa,  whose  name  was 

11  Agabus.  (llj  And  he  came  in  to  us,  and  took  the 
girdle  of  Paul's  loins,  and  bound  his  own  feet  and 
hands,  and  said :  Thus  saith  the  Holy  Spirit,  So 
will  the  Jews  in  Jerusalem  bind  the  man,  who 
owns  this  girdle ;  and  they  will  deliver  him  into 

12  the  hands  of  the  Gentiles.  (12)  And  when  we 
heard  these  words,  we  and  the  residents^  of  the 
place  begged  of  him,  that  he  would  not  go  to  Jem- 

IS  salem.  (18)  Then  Paul  answered  and  said :  What 
do  ye,  weeping  and  crushing  my  heart?  For  I  am 
prepared,  not  only  to  be  bound,  but  also  to  die  at 
Jerusalem,  for  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

14  (14)  And  as  he  was  not  to  be  persuaded  by  us,  we 
desisted;    and  we  said:   Let  the  pleasure  of  our 

15  Lord  take  place.— (15)  And  after  those  days,  we 
prepared  ourselves   and  went   up   to  Jerusalem. 

16  (16)  And  some  disciples  of  Osesarea  went  along 


Gi. 


Ptotemaia 


Sy. 


Sy.  $ons. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


260 


ACTS,   XXL 


0Sy.l*IjiJ3 


'  Sf  .  loaOc  in. 


'Sy. 
Aramaeani, 


17 


19 


20 


21 


22 

28 


with  us,  taking  with  them  a  brother  from  among 
the  earlier  disciples,  whose  name  was  Mnason,  ana 
who  was  from  Cyprus ;  that  he  might  entertain  nn 
at  his  house. 

And  when  we  arrived  at  Jerusalem,  the  brethren 
received  us  joyfully-  (18)  And  the  next  day,  with  18 
Paul,  we  went  unto  James,  when  all  the  Elders^ 
were  with  him.  (19)  And  we  gave  them  saluta- 
tion :  and  Paul  narrated  to  them,  with  particularity, 
what  God  had  wrought  among  the  Gentiles  by  his 
ministry.  (20)  And  when  thev  heard  [it]  they 
glorified  God.  And  they  said  to  him :  Our  brother. 
Thou  seest  how  many  myriads  there  are  in  Jud»a 
who  have  believed :  and  these  are  all  zealous  for  the 
law.  (21)  And  it  hath  been  told  them,  of  tbee, 
that  thou  teachest  all  the  Jews  that  are  among  the 
Gentiles  to  depart  from  Moses,  by  telling  them 
not  to  circumcise  their  children,  and  not  to  observe® 
the  rites  of  the  law.  (22)  Now,  because  they  have 
heard  that  thou  hast  arrived  here,  (23)  do  thou 
what  we  tell  thee.  We  have  four  men,  who  have 
vowed  to  purify  themselves.  (24)  Take  them,  and  24 
go  and  purify  thyself  with  them,  and  pay  the  ex- 

Eenses  along  witn  them,  as  they  shall  shave  their 
eads ;  that  every  one  may  know,  that  what  is  said 
against  thee  is  fake,  and  that  thou  fulfillest  and  ob- 
servest  the  law.  (25)  As  to  those  of  the  Gentiles 
who  have  believed,  we  have  written,  that  they 
should  keep  themselves  from  [an  idol's]  sacrifice, 
and  from  whoredom,  and  from  what  is  strangled, 
and  from  blood. — (26)  Then  Paul  took  those  men, 
on  the  following  day,  and  was  purified  with  them; 
and  he  entered  and  went  into  the  temple,  manifest- 
ing to  them  the  completion  of  the  days  of  the  puri- 
fication, up  to  the  presentation  of  the  offering  by 
each  of  them. 

And  when  the  seventh  day  arrived,  the  Jews 
from  Asia  saw  him  in  the  temple :  and  they  exci- 
ted all  the  people  against  him,  and  laid  hands  on 
him,  (28)  crying  out  and  saying:  Men,  sons  of  28 
Israel ;  help.  This  is  the  man,  who  teacheth  in 
every  place,  against  our  people,  and  against  the 
law,  and  against  this  place;  and  he  hath  also 
brought  Gentiles^  into  the  temple,  and  hath  pollu- 
ted this  holy  place.  (29)  For  they  had  previously  29 
seen  with  him  in  the  city  Trophimus  the  Bphesian ; 


26 


26 


27 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XXII. 


261 


r  Sy.  ia.2i£n] 
Gr.  ^irsipa. 


and  they  supposed,  that  he  had  entered  the  temple 

80  with  Paul.  (30)  And  the  whole  city  was  in  com- 
motion ;  and  all  the  people  assembled  together, 
and  laid  hold  of  Paul,  and  dragged  him  out  of  the 
temple:    and  instantly  the  gates  were  closed. — 

81  (31)  And  while  the  multitude  were  seeking  to  kill 
hiin,  it  was  reported  to  the  Chiliarch  of  the  cohort,? 

82  that  the  whole  city  was  in  uproar.  (32)  And  im- 
mediately he  took  a  centurion  and  many  soldiers, 
and  they  ran  upon  them.  And  when  they  saw  the 
Chiliarch  and  the  soldiers,  they  desisted  ttom  beat- 

33  ing  Paul.  (33)  And  the  Chiliarch  came  up  to  him, 
and  seized  him,  and  ordered  him  to  be  bound  with 
two  chains :  and  he  inquired  respecting  him,  who 

84  he  was,  and  what  he  had  done.  (34J  And  persons 
from  the  throng  vociferated  against  nim  this  thing 
and  that.  And,  because  he  could  not,  on  account 
of  their  clamor,  learn  what  the  truth  was,  he  cpm- 

85  manded  to  conduct  him  to  the  castle.  (35)  And 
when  Paul  came  to  th^  stairs,  the  soldiers  bore 
him  along,  because  of  the  violence  of  the  people. 

86  (36^  For  a  great  many  people  followed  after  him, 

37  ana  cried  out,  saying :  Away  with  him.  (37)  And 
when  he  came  near  to  entering  the  castle,  Paul  said 
to  the  Chiliarch:  Wilt  thou  permit  me  to  speak 
with  thee  ?    And  he  said  to  him :  Dost  thou  know 

38  Greek  ?i»  (38)  Art  not  thou  that  Egyptian  who, 
before  these  days,  madest  insurrection,  and  leadest 
out  into  the  desert  four  thousand  men,  doers  of 

89  evil  ?  (89)  Paul  said  to  him :  I  am  a  Jew,  a  man 
of  Tarsus,  a  noted  city  in  Cilicia,  in  which  I  was 
bom :  I  pray  thee,  suflfer  me  to  speak  to  the  people. 

40  And  when  he  permitted  him,  Paul  stooa  upon 
the  stairsj  and  waved  to  them  his  hand ;  and  when 
they  were  quiet,  he  addressed  them  in  Hebrew,*  and 

XXn.  said  to  them:  (XXII.)  Brethren,  and  fathers, 
2  hearken   to  my  defence   before  you.      (2^    And 
when  they  perceived*  that  he  addressed  tnem  in 
Hebrew,  they  were  the  more  quiet :  and  he  said  to 
8  them  :  (3)  I  am  a  man  who  am  a  Jew ;  and  I  was 
bom  in  Tarsus  of  Cilicia,  but  was  brought  up  in 
this  city,  at  the  feet  of  Gamaliel,  *»  and  instmcted  *•  Sy. 
perfectly  in  the  law  of  our  fathers ;  and  I  was  zeal-    ^]i\Sn^ 
4  ous  for  God,  as  ye  also  all  are.     (4)  And  I  perse- 
cuted  this  way,  even  to  death;  for  I  bound,  and 
delivered   up  to  prison,  [bothj  men  and  women.  | 

Digitized  by  VjOOQIC 


*  Sy.  A^pO* 


•  Sy.  heanl 


ACTS,   XXIL 


'Sy.^^luUD 


"^  By.  ianfliaim 
(mihehead. 


(6)  As  the  high  priest  is  my  witness,  and  likewise    5 
iJl  the  Elders  ;c  from  whom  I  received  letters,  that 
I  might  go  to  the  brethren  in  Damascus,  and  bring 
those  who  were  there  prisoners  to  Jerusalem,  to 
receive  capital  punishment. <^   (6)  And  as  I  travelled     6 
and  began  to  approach  Damascus,  at  noonday,  from 
amidst  tranquillity,  a  great  light  from  heaven  burst 
upon  me.     (7)   And  I  fell  to  the  earth:   and  I    7 
heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me :  Saul,  Saul !  why 
persecutest  thou  me?     (8)  And  I  answered  and    8 
said:  Who  art  thou,  my  Lord?    And  he  said  to 
me :  I  am  Jesus  the  Nazarean,  whom  thou  perse- 
cutest.    (9^  And  the  men  who  were  with  me,  saw     9 
the  light,  out  heard  not  the  voice  that  talked  with 
me.     (10)  And  I  said:  My  Lord,  what  must  I  do?  10 


By.  ^Viinl 


or,  Tuuums, 


And  our  Lord  said  to  me :  Arise,  go  to  Damascus ; 
and  there  will  be  told  thee,  all  that  it  is  commanded 
thee  to  do.     (11)  And  as  I  could  see  nothing,  be-  11 
cause  of  the  glory  of  that  light,  those  with  me  took 
me  by  the  hand,  and  I  entered  Damascus.  (12)  And  12 
a  certain  man,  Ananias,  who  was  upright  according 
to  the  law,  as  all  the  Jews  there  testified  concern- 
ing him,  came  to  me.     (13)  And  he  said  to  me :  13 
My  brother  Saul  I  open  thine  eyes.     And  instantly 
my  eyes  were  opened ;   and  I  looked  upon  him. 

(14)  And  he  said  to  me :  The  God  of  our  fathers  14 
hath  ordained®  thee  to  know  his  will,  and  tu  behold 
the  Just  One,  and  to  hear  the  voice  of  his  mouth. 

(15)  And  thou  shalt  be  a  witness  for  him  before  15 
all  men,  concerning  all  that  thou  hast  seen  and 
heard.    (16)  And  now,  why  delayest  thou  ?    Arise,  16 
be  baptized,  and  be  cleansed  from  thy  sins,  while 
thou  invokest  his  name. — (17)  And  I  returned  and  17 
came  hither  to  Jerusalem.     And  I  prayed  in  the 
temple.    (18)  And  I  saw  him  in  a  vision,  when  he  18 
said  to  me :  Make  haste,  and  get  thee  out  of  Jeru- 
salem;  for  they  will  not  receive  thy  testimony 
concerning  me.    (19)  And  I  said :  My  Lord,  they  19 
well  know  that  I  have  delivered  up  to  prison,  and 
have  scourged  in  all  synagogues,  those  who  believed 

in  thee.     (20)  And  when  Sie  blood  of  thy  martyr  20 
Stephen  was  shed,  I  also  was  standing  with  them, 
and  performed  the  pleasure  of  his  slayers,  and  took 
charge  of  the  garments  of  those  that  stoned  hintL 
(21)  But  he  said  to  me :  Depart ;  for  I  send  thee  21 
afar,  to  preach  to  thcGentiles.^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XXIII. 


263 


22 


23 

24 


And  when  they  had  heard  Paul  as  far  as  this 
sentence,?  they  raised  their  voice,  and  cried  out : 
Away  with  such  a  man  jfrom  the  earth  1  for  he 
ought  not  to  live  I  (23)  And  as  they  vociferated, 
and  cast  off  their  garments,  and  threw  dust  into  the 
air,  (24)  the  Chiliarch  gave  orders,  to  carry  him 
into  the  castle :  and  he  commanded,  that  he  should 
be  examined  with  stripes ;  that  he  might  know,  for 

26  what  cause  they  cried  out  against  him.  (25)  And 
as  they  were  stretching  him  with  ropes,**  Paul  said 
to  the  centurion  who  stood  over  him :  Is  it  lawful 
for  you  to  scourge  a  man,  who  is  a  Roman,*  and 

26  not  yet  found  guilty?  (26)  And  when  the  centu- 
rion heardritj,  he  went  to  the  Chiliarch,  and  said 
to  him:  What  doest  thou?  For  this  man  is  a 
Soman.  (27)  And  the  Chiliarch  came  to  him,  and 
said  to  him :  Tell  me ;  Art  thou  a  Roman  ?  And 
he  said  to  him :  Yes.  (28)  The  Chiliarch  replied 
and  said  to  him:  With  much  money  I  acquired 
Roman  citizenship.^  Paul  said  to  him :  And  I  was 
bom  in  it.  (29)  And  immediately  they  who  were 
intending  to  scourge  him,  fled  from  him :  and  the 
Chiliarch  was  afraid,  when  he  learned  that  he  was 
a  Roman,  because  he  had  stretched  him  [for 
scourging]. 

And  the  next  day,  he  wished  to  know  truly  what 
the  accusation  was,  which  the  Jews  brought  against 
him:  and  he  unbound  him,  and  commanded  the 
chief  priests,  and  the  whole  company  of  their 
head-men,i  to  assemble;  and  he  took  Paul,  and 
brought  him  down,  and  placed  him  among  them. — 

[XXTTT.J  And  when- Paul  had  looked  on  the  as- 
sembly of  them,  he  said :  Men,  mv  brethren ;  I 
have  lived  in  all  good  conscience  before  God  up  to 
2  this  day. — (2)  And  Ananias,  the  priest,  commanded 
those  who  stood  by  his  side,  to  smite  Paul  on  the 
mouth.  (3)  And  Paul  said  to  him :  God  is  here- 
after to  smite  thee,  [thou]  Whited  Wall !  For,  sittest 
thou  judging  me  agreeably  to  law,  while  thou 
transgressest  the  law,  and  commandest  to  smite 
me?  (4)  And  those  standing  by,  said  to  him: 
Dost  thou  reproach  the  priest  of  God  I  (5)  Paul 
said  to  them :  I  was  not  aware,  my  brethren,  that 
he  was  the  priest:  for  it  is  written.  Thou  shalt  not 
6  curse  the  ruler*  of  thy  people. — (6)  And,  as  Paul 
knew  that  a  part  of  the  people  were  of  the  Saddu- 


27 


29 


30 


«  Sy.  waird. 


3 


4 
5 


or,  thongu. 
or,  Roman  eit 


Sy.  Roman- 
ship. 


Sy. 

^1i  m  i5 


Sy  U^} 


Digitized  by 


Google 


264 


ACTS,   XXIII. 


b  Sy.  QlOi^lo 


Sy. 


oees,  and  a  part  of  the  Pharisees,  he  cried  out,  in 
the  assembly :  Men,  my  brethren ;  I  am  a  Pharisee, 
the  son  of  a  Pharisee ;  and  for  the  hope  of  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  I  am  judged.    (7)  And    7 
when  he  had  said  this,  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees 
fell  upon  one  another,  and  the  people  were  divided. 
(8)  For  the  Sadducees  say  that  there  is  no  resurrec-    8 
tion,  nor  angels,  nor  a  spirit:  but  the  Pharisees 
confess  all  these.    (9)  And  there  was  great  vocifer-    9 
ation.    And  some  Scribes  of  the  party  of  the  Phar- 
isees rose  up,  and  contended  with  them,  and  said : 
We  have  found  nothing  evil  in  this  man :  for  if  a 
spirit  or  an  angel  hath  conversed  with  him,  what 
is  there  in  that? — (10)  And,  as  there  was  great  10 
conmiotion  among  them,  the  Ghiliarch  was  afraid 
lest  they  should  tear  Paul  in  pieces.    And  he  sent 
Romans,  to  go  and  pluck  him  from  their  midst,  and 
bring  him  into  the  castle.     (11)  And  when  night  11 
came,  our  Lord  appeared  to  Paul,  and  said  to  him : 
Be  strong ;  for  as  thou  hast  testified  of  me  in  Jerusa- 
lem, so  also  art  thou  to  testify  at  Rome.— (12)  And  12 
when  it  was  morning,  several  of  the  Jews  assembled 
together,  and  bound  themselves  by  imprecations,** 
that  they  would  neither  eat  nor  drink  until  they 
had  slain  Paul.    (18)  And  they  who  had  established  18 
this  compact  by  oath,  were  more  than  forty  persons. 
(14)  Ana  they  went  to  the  priests  and  Elders,  and  14 
saia :    We  have  bound  ourselves  by  imprecations, 
that  we  will  taste  of  nothing,  until  we  shall  have 
slain  Paul.    (15)  And  now,  do  ye  and  the  chiefe®  15 
of  the  congregation  request  of  the  Ghiliarch,  that 
he  would  bring  him  unto  you,  as  if  ye  were  desirous 
to  investigate  truly  his  conduct :  and  we  are  prepared 
to  slay  him,  ere  he  shall  come  to  you. — (16)  And  16 
the  son  of  Paul's  sister,  heard  of  this  plot :  and  he 
went  into  the  castle,  and  informed  Paul.    (17)  17 
And  Paulsent  and  called  one  of  the  centurions, 
and  said  to  him:    Conduct  this  youth  to  the 
Ghiliarch ;  for  he  hath  something  to  tell  him.  (18)  18 
And  the   centurion  took  the  young  man,  ana 
introduced  him  to  the  Ghiliarch,  and  said:  Paul 
the  prisoner  called  me,  and  requested  me  to  bring 
this  youth  to  thee,  for  he  hath  something  to  tell 
thee.    (19)  And  the   Ghiliarch  took  the  young  19 
man  by  his  hand,  and  led  him  one  side,  and  askea 
him :  What  hast  thou  to  tell  me  ?    (20)  And  the  20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XXIIL 


266 


yotmg  man  said  to  him :  The  Jews  have  projected 
to  aak  thee  to  bring  down  Paul  to-morrow  to  their 
assembly,  as  if  wishing  to  learn  something  more 

21  fix)m  him.  (21)  But  he  not  thou  persuaded  by 
them :  for.  lo,  more  .than  forty  persons  of  them 
watch  for  him  in  ambush,  and  have  bound  them- 
selves by  imprecations,  that  they  will  neither  eat 
nor  drink  until  they  shall  have  slain  him :  and  lo, 
they  are  prepared,  and  are  waiting  for  thy  promise. 

22  (22)  And  the  Chiliarch  dismissed  the  young  man, 
after  charging  him :  Let  no  man  know,  that  thou 

28  hast  showed  me  these  things. — (28)  And  he  called 
two  centurions,  and  said  to  them:  Go  and  prepare 
two  hundred  Komans  to  go  to  Caesarea,  and  sev- 
enty horsemen,  and^hpoters  with  the  right  hand<^ 
two  hundred ;  and  let  flbem  set  out  at  the  third 

24  hour  of  the  night  (24)  And  provide  also  a  saddle 
beast,  that  they  may  set  Paul  on  it,  and  carry  him 

25  safely  to  Felix  the  governor.    (25)  And  he  wrote 

26  a  letter  and  gave  them,  in  which  was,  thus :  (26) 
Claudius  Lvsias  to  the  excellent  governor  Felix ; 

27  greeting.  (27)  The  Jews  seized  this  man,  in  order 
to  kill  nim ;  but  I  came  with  Romans,  and  rescued 

28  him,  when  I  learned  that  he  was  a  Roman.  (28) 
And  as  I  wished  to  know  the  offence,  for  which  they 
criminated  him,  I  brought  him  to  their  assembly. 

29  (29)  And  I  found,  that  it  was  about  questions  of 
their  law  they  accused  him,  and  that  an  offence 
worthy  of  bonds  or  of  death,  was  not  upon  him. 

80  (80)  And  when  the  wiles  of  a  plot  formed  bv  the 
Jews  against  him  came  to  my  knowledge,  I  forth- 
with sent  him  to  thee.  And  I  have  directed  his 
accusers,  to  go  and  contend  with  him,  before  thee. 

81  Farewell.— (31)  Then  the  Romans,  as  they  had 
been  commanded,  took  Paul  by  night,  and  brought 

82  him  to  the  city  of  Antipatris.  (32)  And  the  next 
day,  the  horsemen  dismissed  the  footmen  their  as- 

88  sociates,  that  they  might  return  to  the  castle.  (88) 
And  they  brought  him  to  Caesarea :  and  they  de- 
livered the  letter  to  the  governor,  and  set  Paul 

84  before  him.  (34^  And  when  he  had  read  the 
letter,  he  asked  nim  of  what  province  he  was? 

85  And  when  he  learned  that  he  was  of  Cilicia,  (34) 
he  said  to  him :  I  will  give  thee  audience,  when  thy 
accusers  arrive.  And  he  ordered  him  to  be  kept 
in  the  Prsetorium  uf  Herod. 


oTt  javelin 


Digitized  by 


Google 


266 


ACTS,   XXIV. 


•  Sy.  iM^i 

^  or,  doctrine. 


And  after  five  days,  Ananias  the   high     XXIY. 
priest,  with  the  Elders,  and  with  Tertullus  the 
orator,  went  down,  and  made  a  communication  to 
the  governor  against  Paul.      (2)  And  when  he    2 
had  been  called,  Tertullus  began  to  accuse  him, 
and  to  saj :   (8)   Through  thee,  we  dwell  in  much    3 
tranquillity ;  and  many  reforms  have  come  to  this 
nation,  under  thy  administration ;   and  we  all,  in 
every  place,  receive  thy  grace,  excellent  Felix. 
(4)  But,  not  to  weary  thee  with  numerous  [partic-    4 
ulars],  I  pray  thee  to  hear  our  humbleness,  in 
brief.      (5)    For  we  have  found  this  man  to  be  an    5 
assassin,  and  a  mover  of  sedition  amon^  all  Jews 
in  the  whole  land ;  for  he  is  a  ringlea&r*  of  the 
sect**  of  the  Nazareans.    (6)  And  he  was  disposed    6 
to  pollute  our  temple.     And  having  seized  him, 
we  wished  to  judge  him  according  to  our  law. 
(7)  But  Lysias  the  Chiliarch  came,  and  with  great    7 
violence  took  him  out  of  our  hands,  and  sent  him 
to  thee.     (8)  And  he  commanded  his  accusers  to    8 
come  before  thee.     And  if  thou  wilt  interrogate 
him,  thou  canst  learn  from  him  respecting  all  these 
things  of  which  we  accuse  him.    (9)  And  the    9 
Jews  also  pleaded  against  him,  saying  that  these 
things  were  so. — (10)   Then  the  governor  made  10 
signs  to  Paul,  that  he  should  speak.    And  Paul 
answered  and  said :  I  know  thee  to  have  been  a 
judge  of  this  nation  for  many  years,  and  I  there- 
fore cheerfully  enter  upon  a  defence  of  mysel£ 
(11)  Because  thou  canst  understand,  that  there  11 
have  been  but  twelve  days,  since  I  went  up  to 
Jerusalem  to  worship.     (12)  And  they  did  not  12 
find  me  talking  with  any  person  in  the  temple,  nor 
collecting  any  company,  either  in  their  synagogues, 
or  in  the  city.     (13)    Nor  have  they  the  power  to  18 
prove,  before  thee,  the  things  of  which  tney  now 
accuse  me.     (14)   But  this  indeed  I  acknowledge,  14 
that  in  that  same  doctrine  of  which  they  speak,  I 
do  serve  the  God  of  my  fathers,  believing  all  the 
things  written  in  the  law  and  in  the  prophets, 
(15)  And  I  have  a  hope  in  God,  which  they  also  16 
themselves  expect, — ^that  there  is  to  be  a  resurrec- 
tion of  the  dead,  both  of  the  righteous  and  the 
wicked.     (16)   And  for  this  reason,  I  also  labor  to  16 
have  always  a  jpure  conscience  before  God,  and 
before  men.     (17)  And,  after  many  years,  I  came  17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XXV. 


267 


•  Sy.  50715. 


to  the  people^  of  my  own  nation,  to  impart  alms,** 

18  and  to  present  an  oflfering.  (18)  And.  when  I  had 
purified  myself  these  men  foundf  me  in  the  temple ; 
not  with  a  throng,  nor  with  a  tumult.     But  certain 

19  Jews,  who  came  from  Asia,  were  tumultuous;  (19 
who  ought,  with  me,  to  stand  before  thee,  anc 

20  make  accusation  of  their  own  affiiir.  (20)  Or  let 
these  here  present  say,  whether  they  found  any 
oflfence  in  me,  when  I  stood  before  their  assembly ; 

21  (21)  except  this   one  thing,®  that  I  cried,  while  •  Sy.  trorW. 
standing  in  the  midst  of  them:   Concerning  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead,  am  I  this  day  on  trial 

22  before  you. — (22)  And  Felix,  because  he  under- 
stood fliat  way  fully,  deferred  them,  saying: 
When  the  Chiliarch  shall  come,  I  will  give  hearing 

23  between  you.  (23)  And  he  commanded  a  centu- 
rion to  keep  Paul,  at  rest ;  and  that  no  one  of  his 
acquaintances  should  be  forbidden  to  minister  to 

24  him.— {24])  And  after  a  few  days,  Felix,  and  Dru- 
silla  his  wife  who  was  a  Jewess,  sent  and  called  for 
Paul ;  and  they  heard  him  concerning  faith  in  the 

25  Messiah.  (25)  And  while  he  was  discoursing  with 
them  on  righteousness,  and  on  holiness,  and  on  the 
future  judgment,  Felix  was  filled  with  fear;  and 
he  said :  For  the  present  time,  go :  and  when  I 

26  have  opportunity,  I  will  send  for  thee.  (26)  He 
hoped,  moreover,  that  a  present  would  be  given 
him  by  Paul;  [and]  therefore,  he   often   sent  for 

27  him,  and  conversed  with  him. — (27)  And  when 
two  years  were  ftilfiUed  to  him,  another  governor, 
whose  name  was  Porcius   Festus,  came   into   his 

Elace.     And  Felix,  that  he  might  do  the  Jews  a 
ivor,  left  Paul  a  prisoner. 

XXV.  And  when  Festus  arrived  at  Ci»sarea,  he,  Sifter 
2  three  days,  went  up  to  Jerusalem.     (2)  And  the 

chief  priests  and  the  head  men^  of  the  Jews  made 
8  representations  to  him  concerning  Paul.     (3)  And 

they  petitioned  him,  asking  of  him  the  favor,  that 

he    would  send  for  him  to  come  to  Jerusalem; 

they  placing  an  ambush  to  slay  him  by  the  way. 

4  (4)  But  Festus  made  answer:  Paul  is  in  custody 

5  at  Csesarea,  whither  I  am  in  haste  to  go.  (5)  There- 
fore, let  those  among  you  who  are  able,  go  down 
with  us,  and  make  presentment  of  every  offence 

6  there  is  in  the  man. —  (6)    And  when  he  had  been 


Sy.]j^) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


268 


ACTS,   XXV. 


^  By.  give  me  to 
themasag^ 

"^  Sj.  iom  of  his 
counaeL 


By. 


^aiA!^>^) 


there  eight  or  ten  days,  he  came  down  to  Gffisarea. 
And  the  next  day,  he  sat  on  the  tribunal,  and  com- 
manded Paul  to  be  brought.     (7)  And  when  he    7 
came,  the  Jews  who  had  come  from  Jerusalem  sur- 
rounded him,  and  preferred  against  him  many  and 
weighty  charges,  which  they  were  unable  to  sub- 
stantiate.   (8)  Meanwhile  Paul  mdntained,  that  he    8 
had  committed  no  offence,  either  against  the  Jew- 
ish law,  or  against  the  temple,  or  against  Osesar. 
(9)  But  Festus,  because  he  was  disposed  to  con-    9 
cinate  the  fevor  of  the  Jews,  said  to  Paul :  Wilt 
thou  go  up  to  Jerusalem,  and  there  be  tried  before  ' 
me  for  these  things?    (10)  Paul  replied,  and  said:  10 
I  stand  before  Caesar's  tribunal :  here  I  ought  to  be 
tried.     Against  the  Jews  I  have  committed  no  of- 
fence, as  thou  also  well  knowest.    (11)  If  I  had  11 
committed  any  crime,  or  done  any  thing  worthy  of 
death,  I  would  not  refuse  to  die.     But  if  none  of 
the  things  of  which  they  accuse  me,  is  upon  me, 
no  one  may  sacrifice  me  to  their  pleasure.**     I  an- 
nounce an  appeal   to  Caesar.     (12)  Then   Festus  12 
conferred  with  his  counsellors, <^    and  said:  Hast 
thou  declared  an  appeal  to  Caesar?    Unto  Caesar, 
shalt  thou  go. 

And  when  [some]  days  had  passed,  Agrippa  the  18 
king,  and  Bemice,  came  down  to  Caesarea  to  salute 
Festus.    (14)  And  when  they  had  been  with  him  14 

J  some]  days,  Festus  related  to  the  king  the  case  of 
i^aul,  saying :   A  certain  man  was  left  a  prisoner 
by  Felix :  (15)  And  when  I  was  at  Jerusalem,  the  15 
chief  priests  and  the  Elders  of  the  Jews  informed 
me  respecting  him,  and  desired  that  I  would  pass 
judgment  upon  him  in  their  favor.    (16)  And  I  16 
told  them.  It  is  not  the  custom  of  the  Bomans,  to 
give  up  a  man  gratuitously  to  be  slain ;  until  his 
accuser  appeareth  and  chargeth  him  to  his  face, 
and  opportunity  is  afforded  him  to  make  defence 
respecting  what  is  charged  upon  him.    (17)  And  17 
when  I  had  come  hither,  without  delay,  I  the  next 
day  sat  on  the  tribunal,  and  commanded  the  man 
to  be  brought  before  me.    (18)  And  his  accusers  18 
stood  up  with  him;  and  they  were  not  able  to 
substantiate  any  criminal  charge  against  him,  as  I 
had  expected;  (19)  but  they  had  certain  contro-  19 
versies  with  him    respecting  their  worship,^  and 
respecting  one  Jesus,  who  died,  but  who,  as  Paul 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XXVI. 


269 


20  saicL  was  alive.  (20)  And  because  I  was  not  well 
established  in  regard  to  these  questions,  I  said  to 
Paul :  Dost  thou  ask  to  go  to  Jerusalem,  and  there 

21  be  judged  concerning  these  matters?  (21)  But  he 
requested  to  be  reserved  for  a  trial  before  Caesar: 
and  I  ordered  him  to  be  kept,  till  I  could  send 

22  him  to  Caesar. — (22)  And  Agrippa  said :  I  should 
like  to  hear  that  man.     And  Festus  said  :  To-mor- 

28  row  thou  shalt  hear  him.  (23)  And  the  next  day, 
came  Agrippa  and  Bemice,  with  great  pomp,  and 
entered  the  house  of  trials,  with  the  Chiliarchs  and 
chie&  of  the  city :   and  Festus  commanded,  and 

24  Paul  came.  (24)  And  Festus  said:  King  Agrippa, 
and  all  persons  present  with  us;  concerning  this 
man  whom  ye  see,  all  the  people  of  the  Jews  ap- 
plied to  me,  at  Jerusalem  and  also  here,  crying 

25  out,  that  he  ought  no  longer  to  live.  (25)  Yet  on 
investigation,  I  found  that  he  hath  done  nothing 
deserving  death.  But,  because  he  requested  to  be 
reserved  for  the  hearing  of  Caesar,  I  have  ordered 

26  him  to  be  sent  (26)  And  I  know  not  what  I  can 
write  to  Caesar,  in  regard  to  him :  and  therefore  I 
wished  to  bring  him  before  you,  and  especially 
before  thee,  king  Agrippa ;  that  when  his  case 
shall  have  beeiT  heard,  I  may  find  what  to  write. 

27  (27)  For  it  is  unsuitable,  when  we  send  up  a  pris- 
onery  not  to  designate  lus  offence. 

XXVL  And  Agrippa  said  to  Paul:  Thou  art  per- 
mitted to  speak  in  thy  own  behalf.  Then  Paul 
extended  his  hand,   and  made  defence,  saying: 

2  (2)  In  regard  to  all  the  things  of  which  I  am  ac- 
cused by  the  Jews,  king  Agrippa,  I  consider  nry- 
self  highly  favored,  that  I  may  this  day  make 

8  defence  before  thee :  (8)  especially,  as  I  know  thee 
to  be  expert  in  all  tne  controversies*  and  laws  of 
the  Jews.    I  therefore  request  thee  to  hear  me 

4  with  indulgence.— (4)  The  Jews  themselves,  if 
they  would  testify,  know  well  my  course  of  life 
from  my  childhood,  which  from  the  beginning  was 

5  among  my  nation  and  in  Jerusalem.  (5)  For  they 
have  long  been  persuaded  of  me,  and  have  known, 
that  I  lived  in  the  princely*^  doctrine*^  of  the  Phari 

6  sees.  (6)  And  now,  for  the  hope  of  the  promise 
which  was  made  by  God  to  our  fathers,  1  stand 

7  and  am  judged.    (7)  To  this  hope,  our  twelve 


Gr.  Zijri}|xaira 


•  or,  sea. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


270 


ACTS,   XXVL 


*[^,Ijl-;p 


'  Sy.  XmS^ 


tribes  hope  to  come,  with  earnest  prayers  by  day 
and   by  night:    and   for  this  same  hope,   king 
Amppa,  I  am  accused  by  the  Jews.    (8)  How    8 
judge  ye?    Are  we  not  to  believe,  that  God  will 
raise  the  dead? — (9.)  For  I  myself,  at  first,  re-    9 
solved  in  my  own  mind,  that  I  would  perpetrate 
many  adverse  things  against  the  name  oi  Jesus 
the  ifazarean.    (10)  Which  I  also  did  at  Jerusa-  10 
lem;  and  by  the  authoriW  I  received  from  the 
chief  priests,  I  cast  many  of  the  saints^*  into  prison ; 
and  when  they  were  put  to  death  by  them,  I  took 
part  with  those  that  condemned  them.    (11)  And  11 
m  every  synagogue  I  tortured  them,  while  I  press- 
ed them  to  become  revilers  of  the  name  of  Jesus. 
And  in  the  great  wrath,  with  which  I  was  filled 
against  them,  I  also  went  to  other  cities  to  perse- 
cute them.    (12)  And,  as  I  was  going  for  this  12 
purpose  to  Damascus,  with  the  authority  and  li- 
cense of  the  chief  priests,  (13)  at  mid-day,  on  the  18 
road,  I  saw,  O  king,  a  light  exceeding  that  of  the 
sun,  beaming  from  heaven  upon  me,  and  upon  all 
those  with  me.    (14)  And  we  all  fell  to  the  groimd;  14 
and  I  heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  me,  in  Hebrew: 
Saul,  Saull  why  persecutest  thou  me?    It  will  be 
a  hard  thing  for  thee  to  kick  against  the  goads. 
(15)  And  I  said:    My  Lord,  who  art  thou?    And  16 
our  Lord  said  to  me :   I  am  Jesus  the  Nazarean, 
whom  thou  persecutest.    (16)  And  he  said  to  me :  16 
Stand  upon  thy  feet ;  for  I  have  appeared  to  thee, 
for  this  purpose,  to  constitute  thee  a  minister  and 
a  witness  of  this  thy  seeing  me,  and  of  thy  seeing 
me  hereafter.    (17)  And  I  will  deliver  thee  from  17 
the  people  of  the  Jews,  and  from  other  nations ;  to 
whom  I  send  thee,  (18^  to  open  their  eyes ;  that  18 
they  may  turn  from  aarkness  to  the  light,  and 
from  the  dominion  of  Satan  unto  God ;  and  may 
receive  remission  of  sins,  and  a  portion  with  the 
saints,®  by  faith  in  me.     (19)    Wherefore,  king  19 
Agrippa,  I  did  not  contumaciously  withstand  the 
heavenly  vision :  (20)  but  I  preached  from  the  first  20 
to  them  in  Damascus,  and  to  them  in  Jerusalem 
and  in  all  the  villages  of  Judaea;  and  I  preached 
also  to  the  Gentiles,  that  they  should  repent,  and 
should  turn  to  God,  and  should  do  the  works 
suitable  to  repentance.    (21)  And  on  account  of  21 
these  things,  the  Jews  seized  me  in  the  temple,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XXVII. 


271 


Sy.lAA.a^l 


22  sought  to  kill  me.  (22)  But  unto  this  day  Ghxl 
hath  helped  me;  and  lo,  I  stand  and  bear  testi- 
mony, to  the  small  and  to  the  great ;  yet  saying 
nothing  aside  from  Moses  and  the  prophets,  but  the 
very  tmngs  which  they  declared  were  to  take  place: 

28  (28)  [namely,]  that  Messiah  would  suffer,  and  would 
become  the  first  fruits^  of  the  resurrection  from  the 
dead;   and  that  he  would  proclaim  light  to  the 

24  people  and  to  the  Gentiles.— (24)  And  when  Paul 
nad  extended  his  defence  thus  far,'Festus  cried, 
with  a  loud  voice :  Paul,  thou  art  deranged :  much 

25  study  hath  deranged  thee.  (25)  Paul  replied  to 
him:  I  am  not  deranged,  excellent  Festus;   but 

26  speak  words  of  truth  and  rectitude.  (26)  And 
king  Agrippa  is  also  well  acquainted  with  these 
things;  ana  I  therefore  speak  confidently  before 
him,  because  I  suppose  not  one  of  these  things  hath 
escaped  his  knowledge ;  for  they  were  not  done  in 

27  secret     (27)  Eang  Agrippa,   oelievest  thou  the 

28  prophets?  I  know  that  thou  believest.  (28)  King 
Agrippa  said  to  him :  Almost,  thou  persuadest  me 

29  to  become  a  Christian.  (29)  And  Paul  said:  I 
would  to  God,  that  not  only  fliou,  but  likewise  all 
that  hear  me  this  day,  were  almost,  and  altogether, 

80  as  I  am,  aside  from  these  bonds.  (80)  And  the 
king  rose  up,  and  the  governor,  and  Bemice,  and 

81  those  who  sat  with  them.  (31)  And  when  they 
had  gone  out,  they  conversed  with  one  another,  and 
said :  This  man  hath  done  nothing  worthy  of  death 

82  or  of  bonds.  (32)  And  Agrippa  said  to  Festus : 
The  man  might  be  set  at  liberty,  if  he  had  not  an- 
nounced an  appeal  to  Csesar. 

XXVIL  And  Festus  commanded,  respecting  him, 
that  he  should  be  sent  to  Italy,  unto  Gsesar.  And 
he  delivered  Paul,  and  other  prisoners  with  him,  to 
a  certain  man,  a  centurion  of  the  Augustan  cohort^*  '  or,  regimmu. 

2  whose  name  was  Julius.  (2)  And  when  we  were 
to  depart,  we  embarked  in  a  ship  which  was  from 
the  city  of  Adramyttium,  and  was  going  to  the 
country  of  Asia.  And  there  embarked  with  us  in 
the  ship,  Aristarchus,  a  Macedonian  of  the  city  of 

3  Thessalonica.  (3^  And  the  next  day,  we  arrived  at 
Zidon.  And  tne  centurion  treated  Paul  with 
kindness,  and  permitted  him  to  visit  his  friends 

4  and  be  refreshea.    (4)  And  on  sailing  from  there, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


272 


ACTS,    XXVIl. 


^le.onthelOih 
(jfTitrifOr 


«  Sy.  Phomix. 
^Sj.iooked. 


<"  Sy.  wind  cf 


<  S  J.  hand. 
eOt.  Clauda. 


^  Gr.  a  quick- 


because  the  winds  were  against  us,  we  sailed  around 
to  Ojrprus.  (5)  And  we  passed  over  the  sea  of  5 
Cilicia  and  Pamphylia,  and  arriyed  at  Myra,  a  city 
of  Lycia. — (6)  And  there  the  centurion  found  a  6 
ship  of  Alexandria,  which  was  going  to  Italy; 
and  he  set  us  on  board  of  it  (7)  And  as  it  was  7 
hard  navigating,  we  had  scarcely  arrived,  after 
many  days,  over  against  the  isle  of  Onidos.  And, 
because  me  wind  would  not  allow  us  to  pursue  a 
straight  course,  we  sailed  around  by  Crete,  [and 
cam^  opposite  the  city  of  Salmone.  (8)  And  vath  8 
difficulty,  after  sailing  about  it,  we  arrived  at  a 
place  called  the  Fair  Havens,  near  to  which  was 
the  city  called  Lassa. — (9)  And  we  were  there  a  9 
long  time,  and  till  after  the  day  of  the  Jewish  fast*> 
And  it  was  hazardous  [then]  tor  any  one  to  go  by 
sea;  and  Paul  counselled  them,  (10)  and  said:  10 
Men,  I  perceive  that  our  voyage  will  be  [attended] 
with  peril,  and  with  much  loss,  not  only  of  the 
cargo  of  our  ship,  but  also  of  our  lives.  (11)  But  11 
the  centurion  listened  to  the  pilot,  and  to  the 
owner  of  the  ship,  more  than  to  the  words  of  Paul. 
(12)  And,  because  that  harbor  was  not  commodious  12 
for  wintering  in,  many  of  us  were  desirous  to  sail 
from  it,  and  if  possible,  to  reach  and  to  winter  in  a 
certain  harbor  of  Crete,  which  was  called  Phenice,® 
and  which  opened^  towards  the  south. — (18)  And  13 
when  the  south  wind  breezed  up,  and  they  hoped 
to  arrive  as  they  desired,  we  began  to  sail  around 
Crete.  (14)  And  shortly  after,  a  tempest  of  wind© 
arose  upon  us,  called  Typhonic  Euroclydon.  (15J 
And  the  ship  was  whirled  about  by  the  wind,  ana 
could  not  keep  head  to  it ;  and  we  resigned  [the 
ship]  to  its  power.f  (16^  And  when  we  had  paaaed 
a  certain  island,  called  Gyro^s  we  could  hardly  re- 
tain the  boat.  (17)  And  after  hoisting  it  [on 
board],  we  girded  the  ship  around  [the  waist],  and 
made  it  strong.  And,  because  we  were  afraid  of 
falling  upon  a  precipice**  of  the  sea,  we  pulled 
down  the  sail ;  and  so  we  drifted.  (18)  And  as 
the  storm  raged  violently  upon  us,  we  the  next 
day  threw  goods  into  the  sea.  (19)  And  on  the 
third  day,  with  our  own  hands,  we  threw  away  the 
tackling  of  the  ship.  (20)  And  as  the  storm  held 
on  for  many  days,  and  as  no  sun  was  visible,  nor 
I  moon,  nor  stars,  all  hope  of  our  surviving  was 


14 
15 


16 
17 


18 
19 


20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,    XXVII. 


273 


22 
28 


31 


32 


21  wholly  cut  off — (21)  And  as  no  one  had  taken  a 
meal  of  food,  Paul  now  stood  up  in  the  midst  of 
them,  and  said:  If  ye  had  given  heed  to  me,  O 
men,  we  should  not  have  sailed  from  Crete,  and 
we  should  have  been  exempt  from  this  loss  and 
peril.  (22)  And  now,  I  counsel  you  to  be  without 
anxiety ;  for  not  a  soul  of  you  will  be  lost,  but 
only  the  ship.  (23)  For  there  appeared  to  me 
this  night,  the  angel  of  that  God  whose  J  am,  and 

24  whom  I  serve;'  (24)  and  he  said  to  mo:  Fear 
not,  Paul;  for  thou  art  yet  lo  stand  before  Caesar; 
and,  lo,  God  hath  made  a  gift  to  thee  of  all  them 

25  that  sail  with  thee.  (25)  Therefore,  men,  be  ye 
courageous ;  for  I  confide  in  God,  that  it  will  be  as 

26  was  told  to  me.    (26)  Yet  we  are  to  be  cast  upon 

27  a  certain  island — (27)  And  after  the  fourteen  days 
of  our  roaming  and  tossing  on  the  Adriatic  sea, 
at  midnight,  the  sailors  conceived  that  they  ap- 

28  preached  land.  (28)  And  they  cast  the  lead,  and 
found  twenty  fathoms.^^   And  again  they  advanced 

29  a  little,  and  they  found  fifteen  fathoms.  (29)  And 
as  we  feared  lest  we  should  be  caught  in  places 
where  were  rocks,  they  cast  four  anchors  from  the 
stem  of  the  ship,  and  prayed  for  the  morning.^ — 

30  (30)  And  the  sfulors  sought  to  flee  out  of  the  ship. 
And  from  it  they  lowered  down  the  boat  into  the 
sea,  under  pretence  that  they  were  going  in  it  to 
make  fiast«  the  ship  to  the  land.  (31)  And  when 
Paul  saw  [it],  he  said  to  the  centurion  and  to  the 
soldiers :  u  nless  these  remain  in  the  ship,  ye  can 
not  be  saved.    (32)  Then  the  soldiers  cut  the  boat- 

33  rope  from  the  ship,  and  let  the  boat  go  adrift. — (33J 
And  while  it  was  not  yet  morning,  Paul  advised 
them  all  to  take  food,  saying  to  them :   In  conse- 

auence  of  the  peril,  it  is  now  the  fourteenth  day 
lat  ye  have  tasted  nothing.      (34)   Therefore  I 
entreat  you,  to  take  food  for  the  sustenance  of  your 
life ;  for  not  a  hair  from  the  head  of  any  of  you, 
85  will  perish.    (35)  And  having  said  these  things, 
he  took  bread,  and  gave  glory  to  God  before  them 

36  all;  and  he  broke  [it],  and  began  to  eat.  (36) 
And  thev  were  all  consoled ;  and  they  took  nourish- 

37  ment     (37)  And  there  were  of  us  in  the  ship  two 

38  hundred  and  seventy-six  souls.  (38)  And  when 
they  were  satisfied  with  food,  they  lightened  the 
ship,  and  took  the  wheat  and  cast  it  into  the  sea, — 


*     or,  worship. 


Sj.  statures, 
i.  e.  of  a  man. 


By,  day. 


"  Sy.  to  tie. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


274 


ACTS,   XXVIII. 


»  Sy.  high  place. 
•  Sy.  deep9. 


•  Now,  Malta. 


^  Sy.  which  was. 


SyU-3 


(89)  And  when  it  was  day,  the  sailors  knew  not  39 
what  land  it  was:  but  they  saw  on  the  margin  of 
the  land  an  inlet  of  the  sea;  whither,  if  possible, 
they  intended  to  drive  the  ship.    (40)  And  they  40 
cut  away  .the  anchors  from  the  ship,  and  left  them 
in  the  sea.     And  they  loosened  tne  bands  of  the 
rudder,  and  hoisted  a  small  sail  to  the  breeze,  and 
made  way  towards  the  land.     (41)  And  the  ship  41 
struck  upon  a  shoal''  between  two  channels^'  of  the 
sea,  and  stuck  fast  upon  it.     And  the  forward  part 
rested  upon  it,  and  was  immovable ;  but  the  after 

i)art  was  shattered  by  the  violence  of  the  waves. — 
42)  And  the  soldiers  were  disposed  to  slay  the  42 
prisoners ;  lest  they  should  resort  to  swimming,  and 
escape  from  them.      (43)  But  the  centurion  kept  48 
them  from  it,  because  he  was  desirous  to  preserve? 
Paul.    And  those  who  were  able  to  swim,  he  com- 
manded to  swim  off  first,  and  pass  to  the  land.    (44)  44 
And  the  rest,  he  made  to  transport  themselves  on 
planks,  and  on  other  timbers  oi  the  ship.     And  so 
they  all  escaped  safe  to  land. 

And  we  afterwards  learned,  that  the  island  XXVUL 
was  called  Melita.*     (2)  And  the  barbarians  who    2 
inhabited  it,  showed  us  many   kindnesses.    And 
they  kindled  a  fire,  and  called  us  all  to  warm  our- 
selves, because  of  the  great  rain  and  cold  at  that 
time.>>— (3)  And  Paul  took  up  a  bundle  of  fagots    8 
and  laid  them  on  the  fire:  and  a  viper,  [driven] 
bv  the  heat,  came  out  of  them,  and  bit  his  hand. 
(4)  And  when  the  barbarians  saw  it  hanging  on    4 
his  hand,  they  said:  Doubtless,  this  man  is  a  mur- 
derer ;  whom,  though  delivered  from  the  sea,  jus- 
tice will  not  suffer  to  live.     (5)  But  Paul  shook    5 
his  hand,  and  threw  the  viper  into  the  fire:  and 
he   received  no    harm.    (6)  And  the   barbarians    6 
expected,  that  he  would  suddenly  swell,  and  &31 
dead  on  the  ground.    And  when  they  had  looked 
a  lonff  time,  and  saw  that  he  received  no  harm ; 
they  cnanged  their  language,  and  said,  that  he  was 
a  god.— (7)  And  there  were  lands  in  that  quarter,     7 
b^onging  to  a  man  named  Publius,  who  was  the 
chief  man<^  of  the  island :  and  he  cheerfully  re- 
ceived us  at  his  house  three  days.     (8)  And  the     8 
fitther  of  Publius  was  sick  with  a  fever  and  dysen- 
tery.   And  Paul  went  in  to  him,  and  prayed,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ACTS,   XXVIIl. 


276 


9  laid  his  hand  on  him,  and  healed  him.     (9)  And 
after  this  event,  others  also  in  the  island  who  were 

10  sick,  came  to  him  and  were  healed.  (10)  And 
they  honored  us  with  great  honors :  and  when  we 
left  the  place,  they  supplied  us  with  necessaries. 

11  And  after  three  months  we  departed,  sailing  in 
a  ship  of  Alexandria,  which  had  wintered  in  the 
island,  and  which  bore  the  signal  of  the  Twins.* 

12  (12)  And  we  came  to  the  city  of  Syracuse ;  and 

13  remained  there  three  days.  (13)  And  from  there 
we  made  a  circuit,  and  arrived  at  the  city  Bhegium. 
And,  after  one  day,  the  south  wind  blew  [ravor- 
ably]  for  us,  and  in  two  days  we  came  to  Puteoli, 

14  a  city  of  Italy.  (14)  And  there  we  found  breth- 
ren ;  and  they  invited  us,  and  we  remained  with 
them  seven  days :  and  then  we  proceeded  towards 

15  Home.  (15)  And  the  brethren  there,  hearing  [of 
our  approach],  came  out  to  meet  us  as  far  as  the 
village  called  Appii  Forum,  and  as  far  as  the  Three 
Taverns.     And  when  Paul  saw   them,   he  gave 

16  thanks  to  God,  and  was  encouraged.  {16)  And 
we  went  on  to  Bome.  And  the  centurion  allowed 
Paul  to  reside  where  he  pleased,  with  a  soldier 
who  guarded  him. 

17  And  after  three  days,  Paul  sent  and  called  for 
the  principal  Jews.  And  when  they  were  assem- 
bled, he  said  to  them:  Men,  my  brethren,  al- 
though I  had  in  nothing  risen  up  against  the 
people  or  the  law  of  my  fathers,  I  was  at  Jeru- 
salem delivered  over   in  bonds  to  the  Eomans: 

18  (18)  and  they,  when  they  had  examined  me,  were 
oisposed  to   release  me,  because    they  found   in 

19  me  no  offence  deserving  death.  (19)  And,  as  the 
Jews  withstood  me,  I  was  compelled  to  utter  an 
appeal  to  Caesar;  but  not  because  I  had  any  thing 
of  which  to  accuse   the  people®  of  my  nation. 

20  (20)  For  this  reason  I  sent  for  you  to  come,  that  I 
might  see  you,  and  might  state  these  things  to 
you :  for  it  is  on  account  of  the  hope  of  JsraeL 

21  that  I  am  bound  with  this  chain.  (21)  They  saia 
to  him:  We  have  received  no  epistle  from  Judsea 
against  thee ;  and  none  of  the  brethren  who  have 
come  from  Jerusalem,  have  told  us  any  evil  thing 

22  of  thee.  (22)  But  we  are  desirous  to  hear  from 
thee   what  tnou  thinkest;    for  this  doctrine,  we 

28  know,  is  not  received  by  any  one. — (28)  And  they 

Digitized  by 


L  e.  Caslor 
and  PcUust 


•  Sy.  sons. 


Google 


276 


ACTS,  XXVIIL 


By,  t^ainsL 


r  Sjr.  madefoL 


appointed  him  a  day ;  and  many  assembled,  and 
came  to  him  at  his  lodgings,    ^d  he  explained 
to  them  respecting  the  kin^om  of  God,  testifying 
ai;id  persuading  them  concerning  Jesus,  out  of  the 
law  of  Moses,  and  out  of  the  prophets,  firom  morn- 
ing till    evening.     (24)   And  some  of  them   as-  24 
sented  to  his  discourses,  and  others  did  not  assent 
(25)  And  they  yrent  out  from  him,  disagreeing  25 
among  themselves!     And  Paul  addressed  to  them 
this  speech:    Well  did  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  the 
mouth  of  Isaiah   the  prophet,  speak  concerning^ 
your  fethers,   (26)  saying:   Go  unto  this  people,  26 
and  say  to  them.  Hearing  ye  will  hear,  and  will 
not   understand;  and  ye  will  see,  and  will  not 
comprehend.   (27)  For  the  heart  of  this  people  is  27 
stupefied,?  and  their  hearing  they  have  made  heavv, 
and  their  eyes  they  have  dosed ;  lest  they  shomd 
see  with  their  eyes,  and  hear  with  their  ears,  and 
understand  with  their   hearts,  and  be  converted 
unto  me,  and  I  should  forgive  them.    (28)  There-  28 
fore,  be  this  known  to  you,  that  to  the  Gentiles  is 
this  redemption**  of  God  sent :  and,  moreover,  they 
will  hear  it     (29)  And  when  he  had  thus  saia,  29 
the  Jews  retired ;  and  there  were  great  disputations 
among  them.* 

Ana  Paul  hired  a  house,  at  his  own  cost,  and  30 
resided  in  it  two  years;  and  there  he  received  all 
that  came  to  him.    (31)  And  he  preached  concern-  31 
ing  the  kingdom  of  God,  and  taught  boldly  con-  . 
ceming  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  without  hinder- 
ance. 


Connlelum  cf  the  Aet$  of  the  hUaed  LBgaUs;  OuU  if,  Omr 
Bittones. 


*  Thb  verse  (29)  is  not  in  the  MSS.,  nor  in  any  of  the  earlier  editiona :  and 
the  later  editions  place  it  in  the  margin. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  the  Legate,  to  the  Romans. 


L  Paul,  a  servant  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  called 
and  sent;a  and  separated  unto  the  gospel**  of  Gtod, 

2  — (2)  (which  he  had  before  promised,  by  his  pro- 

3  phets,  in  the  holy  scriptures, — {SS  concerning 
nis  Son,  (who  was  born  m  the  flesn,©  of  seed  of 

4  the  house  of  David,  (4)  and  was  made  known  as 
the  Son  of  God,  by  power,^  and  by  the  Holy 
Spirit,)  who  arose  irom  the  dead,  Jesus  Messiah, 

5  our  Lord,— (5)  by  whom  we  have  received  grace, 
and  a  mission  among  all  the  Gentiles,  to  the  end 

6  that  they  may  obey  the  faith  in  his  name;  (6) 
among    whom,    ye    also    sgre    called    by    Jesus 

7  Messiah;) — (7)  to  all  those  who  are  at  Eome, 
beloved  of  God,  called  and  sanctified : — ^Peace  and 
grace  be  with  you,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from 
our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

8  In  the  first  place,  I  give  thanks  to  God  by  Jesus 
Messiah,   on  account  of  you  all;   because  your 

9  &ith  is  heard  of  in  all  the  world.  (9)  And  God, 
whom  in  spirit  I  serve  in  the  gospel  of  his  Son,  is 
my  witness,  that  I  unceasingly  make  mention  of  you, 

10  at  all  times,  in  my  prayers.  (10)  And  I  likewise 
supplicate,  that  hereafter  a  door  may  be  opened  to 
me,  by  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  to  come  unto 

11  you.  (11).  For  I  long  much  to  see  you ;  and  to 
impart  to  you  the  gift  of  the  Spirit,  whereby  ye  may 

12  be  established ;  (12)  and  that  we  may  have  com- 
fort together,  in  the  faith  of  both  yourselves  and 

18  me.  (18)  And  I  wish  you  to  know,  my  brethren, 
that  I  have  many  times  desired  to  come  to  you, 
(though  prevented  hitherto,)  that  I  might  have 
some  fruit  among  you  also ;  even  as  among  other 

Digitized  by 


■  or,  a  LegaU, 

•  Sy.  |^^*^<^ 
'  or,  display  qf 
power. 


Google 


278 


ROMANS.  I. 


•  or,  energy. 

*  or,  tahaiion, 
^  or,  him. 


» Sy.  ]l«^n  tr\  ^\ 
k  Sy. 


Gentiles,  (14)  Greeks  and  barbarians,  the  wise  and  14 
the  unwise :  for  to  every  man  am  I  a  debtor,  to 
preach  [to  him].     (15)  And  so  I  am  eager  to  16 
preach  to  you  also  who  are  at  Rome.      (16)  For  I  16 
am  not  ashamed  of  the  gospel ;  for  it  is  the  power® 
of  God  unto  life,^  to   all   who  believe  in  it;8r 
whether  first  they  are  of  the  Jews,  or  whether  they 
are  of  the  Gentiles.    (17)  For  in  it  is  revealed  the  17 
righteousness"  ol'  (jod,  from  faith  to  faith ;  as  it  is 
written,  The  righteous  by  faith,  shall  live. 

For  the  wrath  of  God  from  heaven  is  revealed  18 
against  all  the  iniquity  and  wickedness  of  men, 
who  hold  the  truth  in  iniquity.     (19)  Because  a  19 
kuowledge  of  God  is  manifest  in  them ;  for  God 
hath  manifested  it  in  them.    (20)  For,  from  the  20 
foundations  of  the  world,  the  occult  things  of  God 
are  seen,  by  the  intellect,*  in  the  things  he  created, 
even  his  eternal  power  and  divinity  ,•*  so  that  they 
might    be    without    excuse;    (21)  because    they  21 
knew  God.  and  did  not  glorify  him  and  give 
thanks  to  nim  as  God,  but  became  vain  in  their 
imaginings,  and  their  unwise  heart  was  darkened. 
(22)  And,  while  they  thought  within  themselves  22 
that  they   were  wise,  they  became  fools.     (23)  23 
And  they  changed  the  glory  of  the  incorruptible 
God  into  a  likeness  to  the  image  of  a  corruptible 
man,  and  into  the  likeness  of  birds  and  quadrupeds 
and  reptiles  on  the  earth. — (24)  For  this  cause,  24 
God  gave  them  up  to  the  filthy  lusts  of  their 
heart,  to  dishonor  their  bodies  with  them.    (26)  25 
And  they  changed  the  truth  of  Gt>d  into  a  lie ;  and 
worshipped  and  served  the  created  things,  much 
more  than  the  Creator  of  them,  to  whom  belong 
fflory  and  blessing,  for  ever  and  ever:    Amen. 
^6)  For  this  cause,  God  gave  them  up  to  vile  26 
passions:  for  their  females  changed  the  use  of 
their  natures,  and  employed  that  which  is  unnatu- 
ral.    (27)  And  so  also  their  males  forsook  the  use  27 
of  females,  which  is  natural,  and  burned  with  lust 
toward  one  another ;  and,  male  with  male,  they  did 
what  is  shameful,  and  received  in  themselves  the 
just  recompense  of  their  error.     (28)  And  as  thev  28 
did  not  determine  with  themselves  to  know  God, 
God  gave  them  over  to  a  vain  mind ;  that  they 
might  do  what  they  ought  not,    (29)   being  full  of  29 
all   iniquity,   dnd  lewdness,   and  bitterness,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,  XL 


279 


malice,  and  covetousness,  and  envj,  and  slaughter, 
SO  and  strife,  and  gmle,  and  evil  machinations,  (80) 
and  backbiting,  and  slander ;  and  being  haters  of 
God,  scoffers,  proud,  vain-glorious,  devisers  of  evil 
things,  destitute  of  reason,  disregardful  of  parente, 

81  (81)  and  to  whom  a  coveuant  is  nothing,  neither 
affection,  nor  peace,  and  in  whom  is  no  compassion. 

82  (82)  These,  while  they  know  the  judgment  of  God, 
that  he  condemneth  those  to  death  who  perpetrate 
such  things,  are  not  only  doers  of  them,  but  the 
companions  of  such  as  do  them. 

IL  There  is  therefore  no  excuse*  for  thee,  O  man, 
that  judgest  thy  neighbor;  for  by  judging  thy 
neighbor,  thou  condemnest  thyself;  for  thou  that 

2  judgest,  dost  practise  the  same  things.  (2)  And 
we  know  that  the  judgment  of  God  is  in  accord- 
ance with  truth,**  in  regard  to  those  who  prac- 

8  tise  these  things.  (S)  And  what  thinkest  thou,  O 
man,  that  judgest  tnose  who  practise  these  things, 
while  practising  them  thyself — ^that  thou  wilt  ea- 

4  cape  the  judgment  of  Q-od  ?  (4)  Or  wilt  thou 
abuse®  the  riches  of  his  benevolence,  and  his  lonff 
suffering,  and  the  opportunity**  which  he  givetn 
thee  ?  And  dost  thou  not  know,  that  the  benev- 
olence of  God  should  bring  thee  to  repentance? 

6  (5)  But,  because  of  the  hardness  of  thy  unrepent- 
ing  heart,  thou  art  treasuring  up  a  store  of  wrath 
against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  against  the  revelation 

6  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God :  (6)  who  will 
recompense  to  every  man,  according  to  his  deeds ; 

7  (7)  to  them  who,  bv  perseverance  m  good  works, 
seek  for  glory  and  honor  and  immortality,  to  them 

8  he  will  give  life  eternal ;  (8)  but  to  them  who  are 
obstinate  and  obey  not  the  truth,  but  obey  iniqui- 

9  ty,  to  them  he  will  retribute  wrath  and  ire.  (9) 
And  tribulation  and  anguish  [will  be]  to  every 
man  that  doeth  evil ;  to  the  Jews  first,  and  also  to 

10  the  Gentiles:  (10)  but  glory  and  honor  and  peace 
to  every  one  that  doetn  cood ;  to  the  Jews  first, 

11  and  fdso  to  the  Gentiles. — (11)    For  there  is  no  re- 

12  spect  of  persons  with  God :  (12)  for  those  without 
law,  who  sin,  will  also  perish  without  law ;  and 
those  under  the  law,  who  sin,  will  be  judged  by 

18  the  law,— (18)  (for  not  the  hearers  of  the  law, 
are  righteous  before  God ;  but  the  doers  of  the 


Sy.  tOiZllO 


>>  or,  is  fmc 


or,  tpaoe. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


280 


ROMANS,  III. 


'Sy. 


sSy.  |Al2^ 


^or^inteUigence, 


Sy.  writing. 


law  are  justified;  (14)  for  if  Gentiles  who  have  14 
not  the  law,  shall,  by  their  nature, «  do  the  things 
of  the  law ;  they,  while  without  the  law,  become 
a  law  to  themselves :  (15)  and  they  show  the  work  15 
of  the  law,  as  it  is  inscribed  on  their  heart ;  and 
their  conscience^  beareth  testimony  to  them,  their 
own    reflections     rebuking    or    vindicating    one 
another,) — (16)  in  the   day  in  which   God   will  16 
judge  the  secret  [actions]  of  men,  as  my  gospel 

g^aoheth],  by  Jesus  the  MessiaL— (17)    But-  if  17 
ou,  who  art  called  a  Jew,  and  reposest  thyself 
on  the  law,  and  gloriest  in  God,  (18)   that  thou  18 
knowest  his  good  pleasure,  and  discernest  obliga- 
tions,«  because  thou  art  instructed  in  the  law ;  (19)  19 
and  hast  confidence  in  thyself,  that  thou  art  a 

Suide  to  the  blind,  and  a  light  to  them  who  are  in 
arkness,  (20)  and  an  instructor  of  those  lacking  20 
knowledge,^  and  a  preceptor  to  the  young ;  and 
thou  hast  the  appearance  of  knowledge   and  of 
verity  in   the   law:— (21)   Thou  therefore,   who  21 
teachest  others,  teachest  thoii  not  thyself?    And 
thou  who  teachest  that  men  must  not  steal,  dost 
thou  steal  ?    (22)  And  thou  who  sayest,  Men  must  22 
not  commit  aaultery,  dost  thou  commit  adultery  ? 
And  thou  who  contemnest  idols,  dost  thou  plun- 
der the  sanctuary  ?     (28)  And  thou  who  gloriest  23  . 
in  the  law,  dost  thou,  by  acting  contrary  to  the 
law,  insult  God  himself?    (24)  For,  the  name  of  24 
Qtodj  as  it  is  written,  is  reviled  among  the  Gentiles 
on  your  account. — (25)  For  circumcision  profiteth,  25 
indeed,  if  thou  fulfillest  the  law:  but  if  thou  de- 
partest  firom  the  law,  thy  circumcision  becometh 
uncircumcision.  (26)  Ana  if  uncircumcision  should  26 
keep  the  precepts  of  the  law,  would  not  that  uncir- 
cumcision be  accounted   as    circumcision?    (27)  27 
And  the  uncircumcision,  which  from  its  nature  fiil- 
fiUeth  the  law,  will  judge  thee ;  who,  with  the 
scripture,    and    with    circumcision,    transgressest' 
agamst  the  law.    (28)  For  he  is  not  a  Jew,  who  is  28 
so  in  what  is  external:  nor  is  that  circumcision, 
which  is  visible  in  the  flesh.     (29)  But  he  is  a  Jew,  29 
who  is  so  in  what  is  hidden :  and  circumcision  is 
that  of  the  heart,  in  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the  letter,' 
whose  praise  is  not  from  men,  but  from  God. 

What  then  is  the  superiority  of  the  Jew?     Or  HI. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,  IIL 


281 


8 


20 


21 


22 


2  what  is  the  advantage  of  circumcision  ?  (2)  Much, 
every  way.     And  first,  because  to  them  were  in- 

3  trusted  the  oracles*  of  God.  (3^  For  if  some  of 
them  have  not  believed,  have  tney,  by  their  not 
believing,    made   the    faith    of  God    inefficient? 

4  (4:\  Far  be  it :  for  God  is  veracious,  and  every  man 
Kuse:  as  it  is  written:  That  thou  mightest  be 
upright, *>  in  thy  declarations;  and  be  found  pure, 

5  when  they  judge  thee.  (5)  But  if  our  iniquity 
establish  the  rectitude  of  God,  what  shall  we  say? 
Is  God  unrighteous,  when  he  inflicteth  wrath  ?    (I 

6  speak  as  a  man.)    (6)  Far  from  it    Otherwise  how 

7  will  God  judge  the  world?  (7)  But  if  the  truth 
of  God  hath  been  furthered  by  my  falsehood,  to 
his  glory ;  why  am  I  then  condemned  as  a  sinner? 
(8)  Or  shall  we  say — ^as  some  have  slanderously 
reported  us  to  say : — We  will  do  evil  things,  that 
good  [results]  mav  come  ? — The  condemnation  of 

9  such  is  reserved  jot  justice. — (9)  What  then,  have 
WE  the  superiority,  when  we  have  before  decided 
as  to  both  Jews  and  Gentiles,  that  all  of  them  are 

10  under  sin  ?     (10)  As  it  is  written :  There  i&  none 

11  righteous ;  no,  no  one :    (11)  and  none  that  under- 

12  standeth ;  nor  that  seeketh  after  Qtod,  (12)  They 
have  all  turned  aside,  together ;  and  become  repro- 
bates.    There  is  none  that  doeth  good ;    no,  not 

13  one.  (13)  Their  throats  are  open  sepulchres,  and 
their  tongues  treacherous;     and  the  venom   of 

14  the  asp  is  under  their  lips.    (14)  Their  mouth  is 

15  full  of  cursing  and  bitterness ;  (15)  and  their  feet 

16  are  swift  to  shed  blood.     (16)   IJestruction  and 

17  anguish  are  in  their  paths :    (17)  and  the  path  of 

18  peacefulness  they  have  not  known:  (18^  and  the 

19  rear  of  God  is  not  before  their  eyes.— (l9)  Now 
we  know,  that  whatever  the  law  saith,  it  saith  to 
them  who  are  under  the  law ;  that  every  mouth 
may  be  stopped,  and  all  the  world  be  guilty  before 
God.  (20)  Wherefore,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law, 
no  flesh®  is  justified  before  him :  for,  by  the  law, 
sin  is  known. 

But  now,  the  righteousness^  of  God  without  the 
law,  is  manifested ;  and  the  law  and  the  prophets 
testify  of  it:  (22)  even  the  righteousness  of  God, 
which  is  by  feitn  in  Jesus  Messiah,  for  every  one, 
and  on  every  one,  that  believeth  in  him :  for  there 
28  is  no  distinction;  (23)  for  they  have  all  sinned. 


Sy  ]\<r% 


^sy.^]a 


«  or,  man, 
*  Sy.  ]LqS\d 


Digitized  by 


Google 


282 


ROMANS,  IV. 


*  Sy.  ]>f^f^^-> 
^  OTtrighteously. 


^  or  mak$  void. 


»  Sy.  OO^^V^ 

*•  Sy.  rii]^\ 
°Sy.Voni?l 


*  Sy.  ]Iqj]d 


and  faUed  of  the  glorv  of  God.    (24)  And  they  24 
are  justified  gratuitously,*  by  grace,  and  by  the 
redemption^  which  is  in  Jesus  Messiah;  (25)  whom  26 
God  hath  preconstituted  a  propitiation, «  by  faith 
in  his  blood,  because  of  our  sins,  which  we  before 
committed,  (26)  in  the  space  which  God  in  his  26 
long  suffering  gave  to  us,  for  the  manifestation  of 
his  righteousness  at  the   present  time;   that  he 
might  be  righteous,  and  might  with  righteousness*^ 
justify  him  who  is  in  the  faith  of  bur  Lord  Jesus 
Messiah, — (27)    Where  then  is   glorying?    It   is  27 
annihilated, — By  what  law?    by  that  of  works? 
Nay :  but  by  the  law  of  faith,    (28)  We  therefore  28 
conclude,  that  it  is  by  faith  a  man  is  justified,  and 
not  by  the  works  of  the  law.     (29J  For,  is  he  the  29 
God  of  the  Jews  only,  and  not  or  the  Gentiles  ? 
Nay :  of  the  Gtentiles  also.    (30)  Because  there  is  30 
one  Gk)d,  who  justifieth  the  circumcision  by  fiiith, 
and  theuncircumcision  by  the  same  faith.    (31)  Do  31 
we  then  nullify*  the  law  by  faith  ?    Far  be  it.    On 
the  contrary,  we  establish  the  law. 

What  then  shall  we  say  concerning  Abraham  IV. 
the  patriarch,  that  by  the  flesh  he  obtained?     (2)    2 
But  if  Abraham  was  justified  by  works,  he  had 
tox)und  of]  glorying;  jret  not  before  God.     (3)    8 
For  what  saith  tne  scripture?      That  Abraham 
believed  Gtod,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for 
righteousness.*     (4)  But  to  him  that  work^th,  the    4 
reward  is  not  reckoned  as  of  grace,  but  as  a  debt 
to  him,    (5)  Whereas,  to  him  that  worketh  not,     5 
but  only  believeth  in  him  that  justifieth  sinners, 
his  faith  is  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness.  *> 
(6)  As  David  also  speaketh  of  the  blessedness  of     6 
the  man,  to  whom  God  reckoneth  righteousness^ 
without  works,  (7)  saying:  Blessed  are  they,  whose    7 
iniquity  is  forgiven,  and  whose  sins  are  covered 
up :  (8)  and.  Blessed  is  the  man,  to  whom  God    8 
will    not  reckon  his   sin.     (9)  This    blessedness,     9 
therefore,  is  it  on  the  circumcision  ?  or  on  the  un- 
circumcision  ?     For  we  say,  that  Abraham's  faith 
was  reckoned  to  him  for  righteousness.    (10])  How  10 
then  was  it  reckoned  to  him?    In  circumcision,  or 
in  uncircumcision? — Not  in  circumcision,  but  in 
uncircumcision.   (11)  For  he  received  circumcision,  11 
as  the  sign  and  the  seal  of  the  righteousness^  of  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   V. 


283 


faith  while  in  uncircumcision :  that  he  might  be- 
come the  father  of  all  them  of  the  uncircumcision 
who  believe ;  and  that  it  might  be  reckoned  to  them 

12  also  for  righteousness:®  (12)  and  the  father  of  the 
circumcision ;  not  to  them  only  who  are  of  the  cir- 
cumcision, but  to  them  also  who  fulfill  the  steps  of 
the  faith  of  our  father  Abraham  in  [his]  uncircum- 

18  cision. — (13)  For  the  promise  to  Abraham  and  to 
his  seed,  that  he  should  become  the  heir  of  the 
world,  was  not  by  the  law,  but  by  the  righteousness 

14  of  his  faith.  (14)  For  ifthey  who  are  of  the  law  were 
heirs,  faith  would  be  made  void,  and  the  promise 

15  of  no  force.  (15)  For  the  law  is  a  worker  of  wrath ; 
because  where  no  law  is,  there  is  no  transgression 

16  of  law.  (16)  Wherefore,  it  is  by  the  faith  which  is 
by  grace,  that  we  are  justified*" :  so  that  the  prom- 
ise may  be  sure  to  all  the  seed ;  not  to  that  only 
which  is  of  the  law,  but  also  to  that  which  is  of 
the  feith  of  Abraham,  who  is  the  father  of  us  all : 

17  (17)  as  it  is  written:  "I  have  constituted  thee  a 
father  to  a  multitude  of  nations ;"  [namely]  before 
God,  in  whom  thou  hast  believed ;  who  quickeneth 
the  dead,  and  calleth  those  things  which  are  not,  as 

18  if  they  were.  (18)  And  without  hope,  he  confided 
in  the  hope  of  oecoming  the  father  of  a  multitude 
of  nations ;  (as  it  is  written :  So  will  thy  seed  be.) 

1 9  (19)  And  he  was  not  sickly  in  his  faith,  while  con- 
templating his  inert*  body,  (for  he  was  a  hundred 

20  years  old,)  and  the  inert**  womb  of  Sarah.  (20) 
And  he  did  not  hesitate  at  the  promise  of  God,  as 
one  lacking  faith  ;  but  he  was  strong  in  faith,  and 

21  ^ve  glory  to  God ;  (21)  and  felt  assured,  that  what 
God  had  promised  to  him,  he  was  able  to  fulfill, 

22  (22)  And  therefore  it  was  accounted  to  him  for 

23  righteousness.— (23)  And  not  for  his  sake  alone, 
was  it  written,  that  his  faith  was  accounted  for 

24  righteousness;  (24)  but  for  our  sakes  also ;  because 
it  is  to  be  accounted  [so]  to  us,  who  believe  in  him 
that  raised  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah  from  the  dead ; 

25  (25)  who  was  delivered  up,  on  account  of  our  sins; 
and  arose,  that  he  might  justify*  us. 

V.  Therefore,  because  we  are  justified*  by  faith,  we 
shall  have  peace   with  God,  through    our  Lord 

2  Jesus  Messiah.  (2)  By  whom  we  are  brought 
by  fisdth  into  this  grace,  in  which  we  stand  and 


e  Sy.  qj]2l^ 


Sy.^MP 


Sy,  dead, 
>»  Sy.dead, 


»  Sy.  ^jpj 
•  Sy.  ^yy\] 


Digitized  by 


Google 


284 


ROMANS,   V. 


^  or,  ii, 
^Sy.oAjZl 

d  or,  b^  saved, 

«Sy.l2a^Z 


<  or,  likeness. 


*  Sy.  Qj)a!^ 


^Justification, 
or,  acquittal. 


3 


8 

9 

10 


rejoice  in  the  hope  of  the  glory  of  God.  (3)  And 
not  only  so,  but  we  also  rejoice  in  afflictions; 
because  we  know  that  affliction  perfecteth  in  us 
patience ;  (4)  and  patience,  experience ;  and  expe- 
rience, hope :  (5)  and  hope  maketh  not  ashamed, 
because  the  love  of  God  is  diffused  in  our  hearts, 
by  the  Holy  Spirit  who  is  given  to  us.  (6)  And  i^ 
at  this  time,  on  account  of  our  weakness,  Messiah 
died  for  the  ungodly:  (7) — (for  rarely  doth  one 
die  for  the  ungodly;  though  for  the  good,  some 
one  perhaps  might  venture  to  die :) — (8)  God  hath 
here  manifested  his  love  towards  us.  Because,  if 
when  we  were  sinners,  Messiah  died  for  us;  (9)  how 
much  more,  shall  we  now  be  justified  by  his  blood, 
and  be  rescued  from  wrath  by  him  ?*>  (10)  For 
if  when  we  were  enemies,  God  was  reconciled®  with 
us  by  the  death  of  his  Son ;  how  much  more  shall 
we,  in  his  reconciliation,  live**  by  his  life  ?  (11)  And  11 
not  only  so,  but  we  also  rejoice  in  God,  by  means 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  through  whom  we 
have  now  received  the  reconciliation.e 

As  by  means  of  one  man,  sin  entered  into  the  12 
world,  and,  by  means  of  sin,  death ;  and  so  death 
passed  upon  all  the  sons  of  men,  inasmuch  as  they 
all  have  sinned : — (13)  For  until  the  law,  sin,  al-  18 
though  it  was  in  the  world,  was  not  accounted  sin, 
because  there  was  no  law.    (14)  Yet  death  reigned  14 
from  Adam  until  Moses,  even  over  those  who  had 
not  sinned  after  the  likeness  of  the  transgression 
of  the  command  by  Adam,  who  was  the  type^  of 
him  that  was  to  come.— (IS^i  But  not,  as  the  fault,  sr  15 
so  also  the  free  gift.    For  i^  on  account  of  the  fault 
of  one,  many  died ;  how  much  more,  will  the  grace 
of  God  and  his  free  gift,  on  account  of  one  man, 
Jesus  Messiah,  abound  unto  many?      (16)   And  16 
not,  as  the  offence**  of  one,  so  also  the  free  gift.  For 
the  judgment,  which  was  of  one  [offence],  was  unto 
condemnation ;  but  the  free  gift  was,  of  many  sins, 
unto  righteousness.*     (17)  For  if,  on  account  of  the  17 
offence  of  one,  death  reigned;  still  more,  they  who 
receive  the  abundance  of  the  grace,  and  the  free 
gift,  and  the  righteousness,  wiU  reign  in  life,  by 
means  of  one,  Jesus  Messiah.    (18)  Therefore,  as  18 
on  account  of  the  offence  of  one,  condemnation  was 
to  all  men ;  so  on  account  of  the  righteousness  of 
one,  will  the  victory  unto  life*^  be  to  all  men.    (19)  19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   VL 


285 


20 


21 


For  asL  on  account  of  the  disobedience  of  one  man, 
many  became  sinners;  so  also,  on  account  of  the 
obedience  of  one,  many  become  righteous. — (20) 
And  the  entrance  given  to  the  law,  was  that  sin 
might  increase:  and  where  sin  increased,  there 
grace  abounded.  (21)  So  that,  as  sin  had  reigned 
ip  death,  so  grace  might  reign  in  righteousness^  unto 
life  eternal,  by  means  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 


VL  What  shall  we  then  say?  Shall  we  continue  in 
2  sin,  that  grace  may  abound  ?    (2)  Far  be  it :  for  if 

we  are  persons  that  haye  died  to  sin,  how  can  we 
S  a^ain  liye  in  it?    (3)  Or  do  ye  not  know,  that  we 

who  are  baptized  into  Jesus  Messiah,  are  baptized 

4  into  his  death  ?  (4)  For  we  are  buried  with  him 
in  baptism  unto^  death ;  that  as  Jesus  Messiah  arose 
fix)m  the  dead  into  the  glory  of  his  Father,  so  also 

5  we,  to  walk  in  a  new  life.    (S)  For  if  we  haye  been 

Slanted  together  with  him  into  the  likeness  of  his 
eath,  so  shall  we  be  also  into  his  resurrection, 

6  (6)  For  we  know,  that  our  old  man  is  crucified 
with  him ;  that  the  body  of  sin  might  be  abolished, 

7  and  we  be  no  more  seryants  to  sin :  (7)  for  he  that 

8  is  dead  [to  it],  is  emancipated  from  sin.  (8)  If 
then  we  are  dead  with  Messiah,  let  us  belieye  that 

9  we  shall  liye  with  the  same  Messiah.  (9)  For  we 
know  that  Messiah  rose  from  the  dead,  and  no 
more  dieth;  death  hath  no  dominion  oyer  him. 

iO  (10)  For  in  dying,  he  died  for  sin,  once :  and  in 

11  liying,  he  liyeth  unto  God.  (11)  So  also  do  ye  ac- 
count yourselyes  as  being  dead  to  sin,  and  aliye  to 

12  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.— (12)  There- 
fore let  not  sin  reign  in  your  dead*>  boiiy,  so  that 

18  ye  obey  its  lusts.  (13)  And  also  giye  not  up  your 
memb^  as  instruments  of  eyil  unto  sin,  but  giye 
up  yourselyes  to  God,  as  those  who  haye  been  re- 
suscitated from  the  dead ;  and  let  your  members  be 

14  instruments  for  the  righteousness®  of  God.  (14) 
And  sin  shall  not  haye  dominion  oyer  you ;  for  ye 

15  are  not  under  the  law,  but  under  grace.— (15)  What 
then?    Shall  we  sin,  because  we  are  not  under  the 

16  law,  but  under  grace  ?  Far  be  it.  (16)  Know  ye 
not^  that  to  whomsoeyer  ye  giye  up  yourselyes  to 
serye  in  bondage,  his  seryants  ye  are,  whom  ye 
serye ;  whether  it  be  to  sin,  or  whether  it  be  to 

17  righteousness,  that  ye  giye  ear?    (17)  But  thanks 


Sy.'IZojlno 


*  or,  tnlo 


*»  or,  mortcU, 


•Sy.")ZQ4]a.i> 


Digitized  by 


Google 


286 


ROMANS.   VIL 


20 


21 
22 


or,  in  ;  i.  e.  m 
the  spiritual 
body  of  Mes- 
siah. 


*  or,  excited. 


c   S7.   writing. 


be  to  God,  that  ye  were  Ponce]  the  servants  of  sin, 
but  have  [now]  fix»m  the  heart  obeyed  that  form  of 
doctrine  to  which  ye  are  devoted.  (18)  And  when  18 
ye  were  emancipated  from  sin,  ye  became  servants 
to  righteousness.  (19)— (I  speak  as  among  men,  19 
because  of  the  infirmity  of  your  flesh.) — As  ye 
[once]  gave  up  your  members  to  the  servitude  of 
pollution  and  iniquity,  so  also  now  give  ye  up  your 
members  to  the  servitude  of  righteousness  and 
sanctity.  (20)  For  when  ye  were  the  servants  of 
sin,  ye  were  emancipated  from  righteousness. 
(21)  And  what  harvest  had  ye  then,  in  that  of 
which  ye  are  now  ashamed  ?  For  the  result  thereof 
is  death.  (22)  And  now,  as  ye  have  been  emanci- 
pated from  sin,  and  have  become  servants  to  God, 
your  fruits  are  holy ;  and  the  result  thereof  is  life 
everlasting.  (23)  For  the  wages  of  sin  is  death;  28 
but  the  free  gift  of  God  is  life  eternal,  through  our 
Lord  Jesus  Messiah. 

Or  do  ye  not  knoyir,  my  Brethren, — (for  I  am  VIL 
speaking  to  them  that  know  the  law,) — that  the 
law  hatn  dominion  over  a  man,  as  long  as  he  is 
alive  ?     (2)  Just  as  a  woman,  by  the  law,  is  bound     2 
to  her  husband,  as  long  as  he  is  alive :  but  if  her 
husband  should  die,  she  is  freed  from  the  law  of 
her  husband.     (8)  And  if,  while  her  husband  is    8 
alive,  she  should  adhere  to  another  man,  she  would 
become  an  adulteress :  but  if  her  husband  should 
die,  she  is  freed  from  the  law ;  and  would  not  be  an 
adulteress  though  joined  to  another  man.    (4)  And    4 
now,  my  brethren,  ye  also  have  become  dead  to  the 
law,  bya  the  body  of  Messiah ;  that  ye  might  be 
joined  to  another,  [even]  to  him  who  arose  from  the 
dead ;  and  might  yield  fruits  unto  God.     (5)  For    5 
while  we  were  in  the  flesh,  the  emotions  of  sin 
which  are  by  the  law,  were  active**  in  our  members, 
that  we  should  bear  fruits  unto  death.    (6)  But  now     6 
we  are  absolved  from  the  law,  and  are  dead  to  that 
which  held  us  in  its  grasp ;  that  we  might  henceforth 
serve  in  the  newness  of  the  spirit,  and  not  in  the 
oldness  of  the  letter.^ 

What  shall  we  say  then?     Is  the  law  sin?    Far    7 
be  it.     For  I  had  not  learned  sin,  except  by  means 
of  the  law :  for  I  had  not  known  concupiscence,  had 
not  the  law  said.  Thou  shalt  not  covet:   (8)  and    8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   VIIL 


287 


bj  this  oommandment,  sin  found  occasion,  and 

perfected  in  me  all  concupiscence :  for  without  the 

9  law,  sin  was  dead.    (9)  And  !^  without  the  law,  was 

alive  formerly ;  but  wnen  the  commandment  came, 

10  sin  became  alive,  and  I  died ;  (10)  and  the  command- 
ment of  life  was  found  by  me  [to  be]  unto  death. 

11  (11)  For  sin,  by  th3  occasion  which  it  foimd  by 
means  of  the  commandment^  seduced  me;   and 

12  thereby  slew  me.  (12)  Wherefore,  the  law  is  holy ; 
and  the  commandment  is  holy,  and  righteous,  and 

IS  good. — (13)  Did  that  which  is  good,  therefore, 
become  death  to  me  ?  Far  be  it  But  sin,  that  it 
might  be  seen  to  be  sin,  perfected  death  in  me  by 
means  of  that  good  [law] ;  that  sin  might  the  more 
be  condemned,  by  means  of  the  commandment 

14  (14)  For  we  know,  that  the  law  is  spiritual  ;^  but  I  am 

15  carnal,®  and  sold  to  sin.  (15)  For  what  I  am  doing, 
I  know  not:  and  what  I  would,  I  do  not  perform; 

16  but  what  I  hate,  that  I  do.  (16)  And  if  I  do  what 
I  would  not,  I  testify  of  the  law,  that  it  is  right.^ 

17  (17)  And  then,  it  is  no  more  I  who  do  that  thing ; 

18  but  sin,  which  dwelleth  in  me.  (18)  For  I  know, 
that  in  me,  (that  is,  in  my  flesh, J  good  dwelleth  not: 
because,  to  approve  the  good,  is  easy  for  me ;  but 

19  to  do  it,  I  am  unable.  (19)  For  I  do  not  perform 
the  good,  which  I  would  perform ;  but  the  bad, 
whi^  I  would  not  perform,  that  I  do  perform. 

20  (20)  And  if  I  do  what  I  would  not,  it  is  not  I  that 

21  do  it,  but  sin  which  dwelleth  in  me.  (21)  I  find 
therefore  a  law  coinciding  with  my  conscienoe,9 
which  assenteth  to  my  doing  good,  whereas  evil  is 

22  near  to  me.     (22)  For  I  rejoice  in  the  law  of  God, 

23  in  the  interior  man.  (23)  But  I  see  another  law  in 
my  members,  which  warreth  against  the  law  of  my 
conscience,  and  maketh  me  a  captive  to  the  law  of 

24  sin  which  existeth  in  my  members.  (24)  0,  a  mis- 
erable man,  am  1 1     Who  will  rescue  me  from  this 

25  body  of  death  ?  (25)  I  thank  God ;  by  means  of 
our   Lord    Jesus   Messiah    [I   shall  be  rescued.] 

26  (26)  Now,  therefore,  in  my  conscience, >»  I  am  a 
servant  of  the  law  of  God;  but  in  my  flesh,  I  am  a 
servant  of  the  law  of  sin. 

Vlll.  There  is  therefore  no  condemnation,  to  them 
who,  in  Jesus  Messiah,  walk  not  after  the  flesh. 
(2)  For  the  law  of  the  spirit  of  life,  which  is  in 


Jlesh. 


Sy. 


'  or,  reason. 

Sy. 


2(2) 


or,  reman, 
Sj. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


288 


ROMANS,    VIll. 


'  Sy.  \Lm^L 


*Sy.^\^ 


<  or,  wkortal. 


8  or,  eonduet. 


^  Sy.foni. 


1  or,  reveakd, 

k  or,  revelation. 
^  Sy.  l^s^ 


6 


Jesus  Messiah,  hath  emancipated  thee  from  the  law 
of  sin  and  death.  (8)  Inasmuch  as  the  law  was  im- 
potent, by  means  of  the  weakness  of  the  flesh,  God 
sent  his  ^n  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,  on  account 
of  sin ;  that  He  might,  in  his  flesh,  condemn  sin ; 
(4)  so  that  the  righteousness*  of  the  law  might  be 
fulfilled  in  us;  since  it  is  not  in  the  flesh  that  we 
walk,  but  in  the  Spirit.  (5)  For  they  who  are  in  the 
flesh,  do  mind*>  the  things  of  the  flesh :  and  they  who 
are  of  the  Spirit,  do  mind  the  things  of  the  Spirit 
(6)  For  mindingc  the  things  of  the  flesh,  is  death ; 
but  minding  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is  life  and 
peace.  (7)  Because  minding  the  things  of  the  flesh,  7 
is  enmity  towards  God :  for  it  doth  not  subject  it- 
self to  the  law  of  God,  because  it  is  not  possible. 
(8)  And  they  who  are  in  the  flesh  cannot  please  8 
Qtxi — (9)  Ye,  however,  are  not  in  the  flesh,  but  in  9 
the  Spirit;  if  the  Spirit  of  God  truly  dwelleth  in  you. 
And  if  in  any  one  there  is  not  the  Spirit  of  Messiah, 
he  is  none  of  his.  (10)  But  if  Messiah  is  in  you,  10 
the  body  is  dead,  in  regard*^  to  sin ;  and  the  Spirit  is 
alive  in  regard^  to  righteousness.  (11)  And  if  the  11 
Spirit  of  him,  who  raised  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah 
fix)m  the  dead,  dwelleth  in  you ;  he  who  raised  our 
Lord  Jesus  Messiah  from  the  dead,  will  also  vivify 
your  dead^  bodies,  because  of  his  Spirit  that  dwelleth 
m  you. 

Now  we  are  debtors,  my  Brethren,  not  to  the  12 
flesh,  that  we  should  walk  according  to  the  flesh : — 

S8)  (For  if  ye  live  according  to  the  flesh,  ye  are  to  13 
e.    But  if,  by  the  Spirit,  ye  mortify  the  practices^ 
of  the  body,  ye  will  live.    (14)  For  they  who  are  14 
led  by  the  Spirit  of  Qt>d,  they  are  the  sons  of  God :) — 

(15)  For  ye  have  not  received  the  spirit  of  bondage,  15 
again  to  fear ;  but  ye  have  received  the  Spirit  of 
adoption,  by  which  we  cry.  Father,  our  Father. 

(16)  And  this  Spirit  testifieth  to  our  spirit,  that  we  16 
are  the  sons  of  God.  (17)  And  if  sons,  then  heirs ;  17 
heirs  of  God,  and  participators**  of  the  inheritance 

of  Jesus  Messiah :  so  that,  if  we  suffer  with  him,  we 
shall  also  be  glorified  with  him. — (18)  For  I  reckon,  18 
that  the  sufferings  of  the  present  time,  are  not  com- 
parable with  the  glory  which  is  to  be  developed* 
m  us.  (19)  For  th6  whole  creation  is  hoping  and  19 
waiting  for  the  development*^  of  the  sons  of  God. 
(20)  For  the  creation*  wais  subjected  to  vanity,  not  by  20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   VIII. 


»  Sy.  lA*jb 


its  own  choice,  but  because  of  him  who  subjected  it, 

21  (21)  in  the  hope,  that  also  the  creation  itself  would 
,  be  emancipated  from  the  bondage  of  corruption, 

into  the  liberty  of  the  glory  of  the  sons  of  God. 

22  (22)  For  we  know,  that  all  the  creatures"  are  groan- 
28  ing  and  travailing  in  pain  unto  this  day .     (23)  And 

not  only  they,  but  we  also  in  whom  are  the  first 
fruits  of  the  Spirit,  we  groan  within  ourselves,  and 
look  anxiously  for  the  adoption  of  sons,  the  redemp- 

24  tion  of  our  bodies.     (24)  feecause  we  live  in"  hopje.  ■  or,  fty. 
But  hope  that  is  seen,  is  not  hope :  for  if  we  saw  it, 

25  how  should  we  hope  for  it?  (25)  But  if  we  hope 
for  that  which  is  not  seen,  we  are  in  patient  waiting. 

26  (26)  So  also  the  Spirit  aideth  our  weakness.  For 
we  know  not  what  to  pray  for,  in  a  proper  manner ; 
but  the  Spirit  prayeth  for  us,  with  groa;ns  not 

27  expressible:  (27)  and  the  explorer  of  hearts,  he 
knoweth  what  is  the  mind  of  the  Spirit ;  because  he 
prayeth  for  the  saints,  agreeably  to  the  good  pleas- 

28  ure  of  God.— (28)  And  we  know  that  he  aideth 
them  in  all  things,  for  good,  who  love  God ;  them 

29  whom  he  predestined^  to  be  called.  (29)  And  he 
knew  them,  previously;  and  he  sealed?  them  with 
the  likeness  of  the  image  of  his  Son ;  that  He  might 

80  be  the  first-born  of  many   brothers.     (80)  And 
those  whom  he  previously  sealed,  them  he  called 
and  those  whom  he  callea,  them  he  justified :  and 

81  those  whom  he  justified,  them  he  glorified.    (81 
What  then  shall  we  say^  of  these  things?    If  Go( 

82  [is]  for  us ;  who  [is]  against  us?  (82)  And,  if  he 
spared  not  his  Son,  but  gave  him  up  for  us  all, 
how  shall  he  not  give  us  all  things,   with  him? 

88  (88)  Who  will  set  himself  against  the  chosen  of 
34  God?  It  is  God  who  justifieth.  (84)  Who  is  it 
that  condemneth  ?  Messiah  died,  and  arose,  and  is 
on  the  right  hand  of  God,  and  maketh  intercession 
86  for  ua  (85)  What'  will  sever  me  fi-om  the  love  '  Sj.  Who? 
of  Messiah  ?  Will  affliction  ?  or  distress  ?  or  perse- 
cution? or  famine?  or  nakedness?  or  peril?  or  the 

86  sword  ?  (36)  As  it  is  written :  For  thy  sake,  we 
die  daily :  and,  we  are  accounted  as  sheep  for  the 

87  slaughter.     (87)  But  in  all  these  things  we  are  vic- 

88  torious,  by  means  of  him  who  loved  us.  (38)  For 
I  am  persuaded,  that  neither  death,  nor  life,  nor 
angels,  nor  principalities,  nor  powers,  nor  things 

89  present,  nor  things  to  come,  (39)  nor  height,  nor 

19 


p  or,  marked. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


290 


BOMANS,   IX. 


•  Sy.  \^i^ 

=  f«  behalf  of. 


d  &y.  fallen  to 
fisa. 


depth,  nor  any  other  creature,  will  be  able  to  sever 
me  from  the  love  of  God,  which  is  in  our  Lord  Je- 
sus Messiah. 

I  say  the  truth  in  Messiah,  and  do  not  misrepre-  IX. 
sent ;  and  my  conscience  beareth  me  witness  in  the 
Holy  Spirit ;  (2)  that  I  have  great  sorrow,  and  the    2 
sadness  of  my  heart  is  unceasing.    (8)  For  I  have    3 
prayed,  that  I  myself  might  be  accursed^  from 
Messiah,  for*>  my  brethren  and  my  kinsmen  in  the 
flesh :  (4)  who  are  sons  of  Israel,  to  whom  belonged    4 
the  adoption  of  sons,  and  the  glory,  and  the  cove- 
nants, ^^  and  the  law,  and  the  ministration,  and  the 
promises,  and  the  fathers;   (5)  and  from  among    5 
whom,  Messiah  appeared  in  the  flesh,  who  is  God 
over  all ;  to  whom  be  praises  and  benediction,  for 
ever  and  ever ;  Amen. 

Not,    however,    that   the   word   of  God   hath     6 
actually  failed.^     For  all  are  not  Israel,  who  are 
of  Israel.     (7)  Neither  are  they  all  sons,  because     7 
they  are  of  tne  seed  of  Abraham :  for  it  was  said. 
In  Isaac  shall  thy  seed  be  called.    (8)  That  is,  it    8 
is  not  the  children  of  the  flesh,  who  are  the  chil- 
dren of  God ;  but  the  children  of  the  promise,  are 
accounted  for  the  seed.    (9)  For  the  word  of  pro-     9 
mise  was  this :  At  that  time  will  I  come,  and  Sarah 
shall  have  a  son.    (10)  Nor  this  only ;  but  Eebecca  10 
also,  when  she  had  cohabited  with  one  [man],  our 
father  Isaac,  (11)  before  her  children  were  bom,  or  11 
had  done  good  or  evil,  the  choice  of  God  was  pre- 
declared ;  that  it  might  stand,  not  of  works,  but  of 
him  who  called.     (12)  For  it  was  said:  The  elder  12 
shall  be  servant  to  the  younger.     (18)  As  it  is  13 
written:  Jacob  have  I  loved,  and   Esau  have  I 
hated.    (14)  What  shall  we  say  then?    Is  there  14 
iniquity  with  God  ?     Far  be  it.    (16)  Behold,  to  15 
Moses  also  he  said :  I  will  have  pitv,  on  whom  I 
will  have  pity ;  and  I  will  be  mercinil,  to  whom  I 
will  be  merciful.     (16^  Therefore,  it  is  not  of  him  16 
who  is  willing,  nor  of  nira  who  runneth,  but  of  the 
merciful  God.     (17)  For  in  the  scripture,  he  said  17 
to  Pharaoh:  For  this  very  thing,  have  I  raised 
thee  up ;  that  I  might  shew  my  power  in  thee,  and 
that  my  name  might  be  proclaimed  in  all  the  earth. 
(18)   Wherefore,   he   hath   pity  upon  whom  he  18 
;  and  whom  he  pleaseth,  he  hardeneth. — 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   X, 


291 


19  (19)  But,  peAa^  tiou  wilt  say :  Of  wliat  [then] 
aoth  he  complain?     For,  who  hath  resisted  his 

20  pleasure?  (20)  Thou,  thus  I  Who  art  thou?  0 
man;  that  thou  repliest  against  God!  Shall  the 
potter's  vessel  say  to  the  former  of  it.  Why  hast 

21  thou  formed  me  so?  (21)  Hath  not  the  potter 
dominion  over  his  clay  out  of  the  same  mass  to 
make  vessels,  one  for  honor,  and  another  for  dis- 

22  honor?  (22)  And  if  God,  iDeing  disposed  to  ex- 
hibit his  wrath  and  to  make  known  nis  power,  in 
abundance  of  long-suflFering,  brought  wrath  upon 
the  vessels  of  wrath  which  were  complete  for  de- 

28  Btruction;  (23)  and  made  his  mercy  flow  forth 
upon  the  vessels  of  mercy,  which  were  prepared 

24  by  God  for  glory ;  (24)  namely,  upon  us  who  are 
called,  not  of  the  Jews  only,  but  also  of  the  Gen- 

25  tiles : — (25)  As  also  he  said  in  Hosea :  I  Vill  call 
them  my  people,  who  were  not  my  people;  and 

26  will  pity,  whom  I  have  not  pitied:  (26)  For  it 
shall  be,  that  in  the  place  where  they  were  called 
Not  my  people,  there  shall  they  be  called  The 

27  children  of  the  living  God.  (27)  And  Isaiah  pro- 
claimed concerning  the  children  of  Israel :  Though 
the  number  of  the  children  of  Israel  should  be  as 
the  sand  on  the  sea,  a  remnant  of  them  will  live.* 

28  (28J  He  hath  finished  and  cut  short  the  matter  'J 

29  ana  the  Lord  will  do  it  on  the  earth.  (29)  And 
according  to  what  Isaiah  had  before  said :  If  the 
Lord  of  hosts  had  not  favored  us  with  a  residue, 
we  had  been  as  Sodom,  and  had  been  like  Gomor- 
rha. 

80  What  shall  we  say  then  ?  That  the  Gentiles, 
who  ran  not  aflier  righteousness, «  have  found 
righteousness,  even  the  righteousness  which  is  by 

81  faith :  (81)  But  Israel,  who  ran  after  the  law  of 
righteousness,  hath  not  found  the  law  of  righteous- 

82  ness.  (82)  And  why  ?  Because  [they  sought  it], 
not  by  faith,  but  by  the  works  of  the  law.    For 

38  they  stumbled  at  that  stumbling-stone :    (33)  As  it 
^is  written,  Behold,  I  lay  in  Zion  a  stumbling-stone, 
and  a  stone  of  offence :  and  he  who  believeth  in 
him,^  shall  not  be  ashamed. 

X.     My  Brethren,  The  desire  of  my  heart,  and  my 

intercession  with  God  for  them,  is,  that  they  might 

2  have  life,'     (2)  For  I  bear  them  witness,  that  there 


or,  be  ioved. 
'  Sy.  (he  ward. 


»  Sy.  ^ZoJ-aS 


Sy.  it 


or,  be  saved. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


292 


ROMANS,   X 


^  87.  ^ftfiD  = 

end,  scope, 
sum  mar  I/, 


dSy.^djjp 

'  or,  be  saved, 

*  or,  15  saved. 


^  or,  ^  saveJ. 


qf  our  rotcc. 

^  Sy.  doughty 
cf  then  voice. 


8 


is  in  them  a  zeal  for  God ;  but  it  is  not  according 
to  knowledge.  (3J  For  they  know  not  the  righ- 
teousness of  God,  iDut  seek  to  establish  their  own 
righteousness:  and  therefore  they  have  not  sub- 
mitted themselves  to  the  righteousness  of  God. 

(4)  For  Messiah  is  the  aim*>  of  the  law,  for  righte- 
ousness,® unto  everj  one  that  believeth  in  him. — 

(5)  For  Moses  descnbeth  the  righteousness,  which  is 
by  the  law,  thus:  Whoever  shall  do  these  things, 
shall  live  by  them,  (6)  But  the  righteousness  which 
is  by  faith,  saith  thus:  Thou  shalt  not  say  in  thy 
heart.  Who  ascendeth  to  heaven,  and  bringetn 
Messiah  down?  (7)  Or,  Who  descendeth  to  the 
abyss  of  the  grave,**  and  bringeth  up  Messiah  from 
the  place  of  the  dead?  (8)  But  what  saith  it? 
The  thinge  is  near  to  thy  mouth,  and  to  thy  heart: 
that  is,  'the  word  of  mith,  which  we  proclaim. 
(9)  And  if  thou  shalt  confess  with  thy  mouth  our 
Ix>rd  Jesus,  and  shalt  believe  with  thy  heart,  that 
God  hath  raised  him  from  the  dead ;  thou  shalt  live.^ 
(10^  For  the  heart  that  believeth  in  him,  is  justified ; 
ana  the  mouth  that  confesseth  him,  is  restored?  to 
life.  (11)  For  the  scripture  saith :  Every  one  that 
believeth  in  him,  shall  not  be  ashamed.  (12)  And 
in  this,  it  discriminateth  neither  Jews  nor  Gentiles. 
For  there  is  one  Lord  over  them  all,  who  is  rich, 
towards  every  one  that  calleth  on  him.  (13)  For  18 
every  one  that  shall  call  on  the  name  of  the  Ijord, 
will  have^  life.  (14)  How  then  shall  they  call  on 
him,  in  whom  they  nave  not  believed  ?  Or,  how 
shall  they  believe  in  him,  of  whom  they  have  not 
heard  ?  Or,  how  shall  they  hear,  without  a  preach- 
er? (15)  Or,  how  shall  they  preach,  if  they  are  15 
not  sent  forth?  As  it  is  written:  How  beautiftQ 
are  the  feet  of  the  heralds  of  peace,  and  of  the  her- 
alds of  good  things? — (16)  feut  all  of  them  have  16 
not  obeyed  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  (For, 
Isaiah  said:    My  Lord,  who  hath  believed  our 

Eroclamation  ?>)    (17)  Therefore,  faith  is  from  the  17 
earing  of  the  ear ;  and  the  hearing  of  the  ear,  is 
from  the  word  of  God.    (18)   But  I  say:  Have*  18 
they  not  heard?     And,   lo,   their  proclamation*^ 
hath  gone  out  into  all  the  earth ;  and  their  words 
to  the  ends  of  the  world.    (19)  But  I  say :  Did  19 
not  Israel  know?    First,  Moses  said,  thus:  I  will 
awaken  your  emulation,  by  a  pecple  which  is  not  a 


6 


8 


9 


10 

11 
12 


14 


Digitized  by 


(^ogle 


ROMANS,   XL 


293 


people ;  and  by  a  disobedient  people,  I  will  pro- 

20  voke  you.  (20)  And  Isaiali  was  bold,  and  said: 
I  was  seen  by  those  who  sought  me  not;  and  I  was 

21  found  by  those  who  inquired  not  for  me.  (21)  But 
to  Israel,  he  said :  All  the  day,  have  I  stretched  out 
my  hands  to  a  contentious  and  disobedient  people. 

XL  But  I  say:  Hath  God  cast  off  his  people?  Far 
be  it.  For  I  also  am  of  Israel,  of  the  seed  of  Abra- 

2  ham,  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin.  (2)  Gtod  hath  not 
cast  off  those  his  people  whom  he  before  knew. 
Do  ye  not  know,  wnat,  in  the  scripture  of  God,  he 
said  to  Elijah  ?    When  he  had  complained  to  God 

8  against  Israel,  and  said :  (8)  My  Lord,  they  have 
slain  thy  prophets,  and  have  flirown  down  thy 
altars;  and  I  am  left  alone;  and  they  seek  my 

4  life.  f4)  And  it  was  said  to  him,  by  revelation : 
Beholo,  I  have  reserved  for  myself  seven  thousand 
men,  who  have  not  bowed  their  knees,  and  have 

6  not  worshipped  Baal.  (5)  So  also  at  the  present 
time,  a  remnant  is  preserved,  hj  the  election*  of 

6  grace.  (6)  But  if  by  grace,  it  is  not  by  works : 
otherwise,  grace*>  is  not  grace. *>  And  if  by  works, 
it  is  not  by  grace :  Otherwise,  work®  is  not  work.^ 

7  —^7)  What  then  ?  Israel  did  not  obtain  that  which 
it  sought :  but  the  election^  obtained  it ;  and  the 

8  rest  of  them  were  blinded  in  their  heart,  (8) — (as 
it  is  written :  Qod  gave  them  a  stupid  spirit,  and 
eyes  to  see  not,  ana  ears  to  hear  not,^) — unto  this 

9  verv  day.  (9)  And  again,  David  said :  Let  their 
table  become  a  snare  before  them ;  and  let  their 

10  recompense  be  a  stumbling  block.  (10)  Let  their 
eyes  be  darkened,  that  they  see  not ;  and  let  their 

11  back,  at  all  times,  be  bowed  down. — (11)  But  I 
say:  Have  they  so  stumbled  as  to  fall  entirely? 
Far  be  it.  Rather,  by  their  stumbling,  life®  hath 
come  to  the  Gentiles,  for  [awakeningj  their  jeal- 

12  ousy.  (12)  And  if  their  stumbling  was  riches  to 
the  world,  and  their  condemnation  riches  to  the 
Gentiles;   how  much  more  their  completeness ?f 

18  (13)  But  [it  is]  to  you  Gentiles,  I  am  speaking : 
as  I  am  a  legate  to  the   Gentiles,  I   honor  my 

14  ministry ;  (14)  if,  perhaps,  I  may  provoke  emula- 
tion in  the  children  of  my  flesh,  and  may  vivify? 

16  some  of  them.  (15)  For  if  the  rejection  of  theni, 
was  a  reconciliation  of  the  world ;  what  will  their 


Sy. 

Sy.l,£XL 

*  Sy.  IAaTX^ 


•  or,  scUvation, 


'Sy. 


»  or, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


294 


ROMANS,   XL 


^  or,  be  saved. 
'  Sy.  loA^J 


^  Sv. 


18 


20 


21 
22 


conversion  be,  but  life  from  the  dead?    (16)  For,  16 
if  the  first-fruits  [are]  holy,  then  the  mass  [isj  also : 
and  if  the  root  is  holy,  then  also  the  branches. — 

(17)  And  if  some  of  the  branches  were  plucked  17 
off;  and  thou,  an  olive  from  the  desert,  wast  in- 
grafted in  their  place,  and  hast  become  a  partici- 
pator of  the  root  and   fatness  of  the  olive-tree; 

(18)  do  not  glory  over  the  branches.  For  if  thou 
gloriest,  thou  sustainest  not  the  root,  but  the  root 
Bustaineth  thee.  (19)  And  shouldst  thou  say.  The  19 
branches  were  plucked  ofl^  that  I  might  be  grafted 
into  their  place.  (20)  Very  true.  They  were 
plucked  ofl^  because  they  believed  not ;  and  thou 
Btandest  by  faith.  Be  not  exalted  in  thy  mind,  but 
fear.  (21)  For  if  God  spared  not  the  natural 
branches,  perhaps  he  will  not  spare  you. — (22)  Be- 
hold now  the  benignity  and  the  severity  of  God: 
on  them  who  fell,  severity ;  but  on  thee,  bemgnity, 
if  thou  continuest  in  that  benignity ;  and  if  not, 
thou  also  wilt  be  plucked  off  (23)  And  thev,  if 
they  do  not  continue  in  their  destitution  of  mith, 
even  they  will  be  grafted  in ;  for  Gtod  is  able  to 
graft  them  in  again.  (24)  For  if  thou  wast  pluck- 
ed from  the  wud  olive-tree,  which  was  natural  to 
thee,  and  wast  grafted,  contrary  to  thy  nature, 
into  a  good  olive-tree ;  how  much  more  may  they 
be  grafted  into  their  natural  olive-tree? — (25)  And  25 
that  ye,  my  brethren,  may  not  be  wise  in  your 
own  apprehension,  I  wish  you  to  know  this  mys- 
teiT,  that  blindness  of  heart  hath  in  some  measure 
befallen  Israel,  until  the  fullness  of  the  Gentiles 
shall  come  in :  (26)  and  then,  will  all  Israel  live.**  26 
As  it  is  written :  A  deliverer  will  come  from  Zion, 
and  will  turn  away  iniquity  from  Jacob.  (27)  And  27 
then  will  they  have  the  covenant*  that  proceedeth 
from  me,  when  I  shall  have  forgiven  their  sins. 
(28)  Now,  in  the  gospel,  they  are  enemies  for  your  28 
sake;  but  in  the  election,  they  are  beloved  for  the 
fathers'  sake.  (29)  For  God  is  not  changeable  in 
his  free  gift  and  m  his  calling.^  (30)  For  as  ye 
too  were  formerly  disobedient  to  God,  and  have 
now  obtained  mercy,  because  of  their  disobedience ; 
(31)  so  also  are  they  now  disobedient  to  the  mercy  81 
which  is  upon  you,  that  there  may  be  mercy  on 
them  likewise.  (32)  For  God  hath  shut  up  411  82 
men  in  disobedience,  that  upon  all  men  he  might 


24 


29 
30 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,    XII. 


295 


88  haye  mercy. — (38)  O  the  depth  of  the  riches,  and 
the  wisdom,  and  the  knowledge  of  God!  For 
man  hath  not  searched  out  his  judgments ;  and  his 

84  ways  are  inscrutable.  (34)  For  who  hath  known 
the  mind  of  the  Lord  ?    Or  who  hath  been  a  conn- 

85  sellor  to  him?    (35)  Or  who  hath  first  given  to 

86  him,  and  then  received  from  him  ?  (36)  Because, 
all  is  from  him,  and  all  by  him,  and  aJl  through 
him  to  whom  be  praises  and  benedictions,  ror 
ever  and  ever:     Amen. 

XTL  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  my  brethren,  by  the 
mercies  of  God,  that  ve  present  your  bodies  a  Kv- 
ing  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  to  God,  by  a  ra- 

2  tional  service  [oi  him].  (2)  And  be  not  conformed 
to  this  world ;  but  be  ye  transformed,  by  the  reno- 
vation of  your  minds :  and  discern  ye  what  is  the 
good  and  acceptable  and  perfect  pleasure  of  God. 

8  (S)  And,  by  the  grace  given  to  me,  I  say  to  you 
all :  Do  not  carry  thoughts,  beyond  what  ye  ought 
to  think ;  but  think  with  modesty,  as  God  hath 
distributed    to  each  one  his  measure    of   faith. 

4  (4)  For  as  we  [severally]  have  many  members  in 
one  body,  and  all  those  members  have  not  the 

6  same  ftmctions ;  (5)  so  also  we,  who  are  [collec- 
tively] many  persons,  are  one  body  in  Messiah, 

6  and  are  naturally  members  of  each  other.  (6)  But 
we  have  different  gifts, »  according  to  the  grace 
given  to  us.     There  is  that  of  prophecy,  according 

7  to  the  measure  of  his  faith.  (7)  And  there  is  that 
of  ministration,  possessed  by  one  in  his  ministry. 
And  there  is  that  of  a  teacher,  in  his  teaching. 

8  (8)  And  there  is  that  of  a  consoler,  in  his  conso- 
ling: And  that  of  a  giver, *>  with  simplicity:  And 
that  of  a  presider,c  with  dexterity:  And  of  a  sym- 

9  pathizer,  with  cheerfulness.* — (9)  Let  not  your 
love  be  guileful :  but  be  haters  of  evil  things,  and 

lOadherers  to  good  things.  (10)  Be  affectionate  to 
your  brethren :  and  love  one  another.    Be  foremost 

11m  honoring  one  another.  (11)  Be  active ;  and  not 
slothful.    Be  fervent  in  spirit     Be  laborers  for 


Sy. 


•»  or,  distributor. 
Sy.  standing 
at  the  head. 


*  In  this*  catalogue  of  gifts,  verses  6,  7,  8,  the  Syriiic  merely  describes  them, 
giving  no  directions  for  the  right  use  of  them.  Whether  the  Greek  original  will 
admit  the  same  exposition,  the  learned  will  decide.  I  see  no  evidence,  that  the 
Syiiac  translator  had  an  essentially  different  Greek  text  before  iiim. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


296 


ROMANS,  XIIL 


Gr.  gevor 


Sy. 
commanded. 


b  Sy. 


iViaSn 


our  Lord.    (12)  Be  jpyftil  in  your  hope.    Be  pa-  12 
tient  under  your  afflictions.    Be  persevering  in 
prayer.    (13)  Be  communicators  to  the  wants  of  18 
the  saints.    Be  kind  to  strangers.^     (14)   Bless  14 
your  persecutors :  bless,  and  curse  not    (15)  Be-  15 
joice  with  them  who  rejoice :  and  weep  with  them 
who  weep.      (16)   What  estimation  ye  make  of  16 
yourselves,  [make]  also  of  your  brethren.    And 
mdulge  not  nigh  thoughts;  but  unite  yourselves 
with  the  lowly  minded.    And  be  not  wise  in  your 
own  estimation.     (17)  And  repay  to  no  man  evil  17 
for  evil:   but  let  it  be  your  study  to  do  good, 
before  all  men.    (18J  And  if  possible,  so  fer  as  it  18 
dependeth  on  you,  uve  in  peace  with  every  man. 
(19)  And  be  ye  not  avengers  of  yourselves,  my  19 
beloved ;  but  give  place  to  wrath.    For  it  is  writ- 
ten :  If  thou  dost  not  execute  judgment  for  thyself 
I  will  execute  judgment  for  thee,  saith  God.    (20)  20 
And  if  thy  adversary  be  hungry,  feed  him :  and  if 
he  be  thirsty,  give  aim  drink.     For  if  thou  doest 
these  things  to  him,  thou  wilt  heap  coals  of  fire  on 
his  head.    (21)  Be  ye  not  overcome  by  evil ;  but  21 
overcome  evil  with  good. 

Let  every  soul  be  subject  to  the  authorities  ofXTTL 
magistracy.     For  there  is  no  authority  which  is 
not  from  G-od :  and  the  authorities  which  exist,  are 
established*  by  God.     (2)  He  therefore  who  oppo-    2 
seth  the  authority,  opposeth  the  establishment  of 
Qt)d;  and  they  who  oppose  them,  shall  receive 
judgment.     (8)  For  judges  are  not  a  terror  to  good    8 
aeeos,  but  to  evil  deeds.     Wouldst  thou  then  not 
be  afraid  of  the  authority?    Do  good,  and  thou 
shalt  have  praise  from  it.    (4)  For  he  is  the  min-    4 
isterb  of  God ;  but  it  is  to  thee  for  good.    But  if 
thou  doest  evil,  be  afraid;   for  he  is  not  girded 
with  the  sword  in  vain ;  for  he  is  a  minister  of 
God,  and  an  avenger  of  wrath  to  them  that  do  evil 
things.    (5)  And  therefore,  it  is  necessary  for  us    5 
to  be  obedient,  not  only  on  account  of  wrath,  but 
likewise  on  account  of  our  consciences.    (6)  For    6 
this  cause  also  ye  jpay  tribute  money ;  for  they  are 
the  ministers  of  God,  established  for  these  same 
objects.    (7)  Bender  therefore  to  every  one,  as  is    7 
due  to  him ;  tribute-money,  to  whom  tribute-money; 
and  excise,  to  whom  excise;  and  fear,  to  whom 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   XIV. 


297 


8  fear;  and  honor,  to  whom  honor. — (8)  And  owe 
nothing  to  any  one;  but  to  love  one  another. 
For  he  that  loveth  his  neighbor,  hath  fiilfilled  the 

9  law.  (9)  For  this  likewise,  which  it  saith :  Thou 
shalt  not  kill;  nor  commit  adultery;  nor  steal; 
nor  covet ;  and  if  there  is  any  other  commandment| 
it  is  completed  in  this  sentence :  Thou  shalt  love 

10  thy  neighbor  as  thyself.  (10)  Love  doeth  no  evil 
to  one's  neighbor ;  because  love  is  the  ftdfiUment 

11  of  the  law.-H[ll)  And  this  also  know  ye,  that  it  is 
the  time  and  the  hour,  that  we  should  henceforth 
be  awake  from  our  sleep.  ^  For  now  our  life<^  hath  •  or,  tdlvatm. 

12  come  nearer  to  us,  ^han  when  we  believed.  (12) 
The  night  now  passeth  away,  and  the  day  draweth 
near.  Let  us  tnerefore  cast  from  us  the  works  of 
darkness ;  and  let  us  put  on  the  armor  of  light. 

13  (13)  And  let  us  walk  decorously,  as  in  daylignt ; 
not  in  merriment,  nor  in  drunkenness,  nor  in  im- 

14  purity  of  the  bed,  nor  in  envy  and  strife.  (14)  But 
clothe  yourselves  with  our  !Lord  Jesus  Messiah: 
and  be  not  thoughtful  about  your  flesh,  for  the  in- 
dulgence of  appetites. 

XIV.  To  him  who  is  feeble  in  the  faith,  reach  forth 
the  hand.    And  be  not  divided  in  your  thoughts. 

2  {2)  For  one  man  believeth,  that  he  may  eat  every 

8  tmn^ :  and  he  that  is  feeble,  eateth  herl^.  (3)  And 
he  mat  eateth,  should  not  despise  him  that  eateth 
not;  and  he  that  eateth  not,  should  not  judge  him 

4  that  eateth,  for  God  hath  received  him.  (4)  Who 
art  thou,  that  ihou  judgest  a  servant  not  thine; 
and  who,  if  he  standfeth,  he  standeth  to  his  Lord ; 
and  if  he  falleth,  he  falleth  to  his  Lord  ?  But  he 
will  assuredly  stand ;  for  his  Lord  hath  power  to 

6  establish  him.  (5)  One  man  discriminateth  be- 
tween days;»  and  another  judgeth  all  days  alike. 
But  let  every  one  be  sure,  in  regard  to  his  knowl- 

6  edge.  (6)  He  that  esteemeth  a  day,  esteemeth  [it] 
for  his  Lord :  and  he  that  esteemeth  not  a  day,  for 
his  Lord,  he  doth  not  esteem  [it.]  And  he  that 
eateth,  eateth  to  his  Lord,  and  giveth  thanks  to 
God :  and  he  that  eateth  not,  to  his  Lord  he  eateth 

7  not,  and  giveth  thanks  to  God.  (7).  For  there  is 
not  one  of  us,  who  liveth  for  himself:  and  there 

8  is  not  one,  who  dieth  for  himself.  (8)  Because,  if 
we  live,  to  our  Lord  it  is  we  live ;  or  if  we  die,  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


298 


ROMANS.  XV. 


bgy,  /noV^n 


Sj.iMSLB 


Sy. 


our  Lord  it  is  we  die.   Whether  we  live,  therefore, 
or  whether  we  die,  we  are  our  Lord's.    (9)  More-    9 
over,  for  this  cause  Messiah  died,  and  revived,  and 
arose ;  that  he  might  be  Lord  of  the  dead  and  of 
the  living.    (10)  But  thou,  why  dost  thou  judge  10 
thy  brother?  or,  why  dost  thou  despise  thy  bro- 
ther ?   For  we  must  all  stand  before  the  judgment 
seat  of  Messiah,  (11)  as  it  is  written:  As  I  live,  11 
saith  the  Lord,  to  me  every  knee  shall  bow;  and 
to  me  every  tongue  shall  ^ve  praise.     (12)   So  12 
then,  e  verv  one  of  us  must  give  account  of  himself 
to  God.— (13)  Henceforth,  judge  ye  not  one  anoth-  18 
er;  but  rather,  judge  ye  this,  that  thou  erect  not 
a  stumbling-block  for  thy  brother.    (14)  I  know,  14 
indeed,  and  am  persuaded  by  the  Lord  Jesus,  that 
there  is  nothing  which  is  unclean  in  itself:  but  to 
him  who  thinketh  any  thing  to  be  unclean,  to  him 
only  it  is  defiled.     (16J  But  if  thou  grievest  thy  15 
brother,  because  of  food,  thou  walkest  not  in  love. 
On  account  of  food,  destroy  not  him  for  whom 
Messiah  died. — (16)  And  let  not  our  good  thing  be  16 
matter  of  reproacn.    (17)  For  the  kingdom**  of  17 
God,  is  not  food  and  drink ;  but  is  righteousness, 
and  peace,  and  joy  in  the  Holy  Spirit.    (18)  For  18 
he  wno  is  in  these  things  a  servant  of  Messiah, 
is  pleasing  to  God,   and  approved  before  men.    . 
(19)  Now  let  us  strive  after  peace,  and  after  the  edi-  19 
fication  of  one  another.    (20)  And  let  us  not,  on  20 
account  of  food,  destroy  the  work  of  God.     For 
every  thing  is,  [indeed,]  pure ;  yet  it  is  evil,  to  the 
man  who  eateth  with  stumbling.   (21)  It  is  proper,^  21 
that  we  neither  eat  flesh,  nor  arink  wine,  nor  [do] 
any  thing,    whereby    our    brother  is   stumbled!. 
(22)  Thou  art  one  in  whom  there  is  faith ;  keep  it  22 
to  thyself,  before  God.    Blessed  is  he,  who  doth 
not  condemn  himself  in  that  thing  which  he  al- 
io weth.     (23)  For  he  who  eateth  and  doubteth,  is  28 
condemned ;  because  [he  eateth]  not  in  faith.   For 
every  thing  which  is  not  of  faith,  is  sin. 

We  then  who  are  strong,  ought  to  bear  the  XV. 
infirmity  of  the  weak,  and  not  to  please  ourselves. 
(2)  But  each  of  us  should  please  his  neighbor,  in     2 
good  things,  as  conducive  to  edification.*     (8)  B^     8 
cause  Messiah  also  did  not  please  himself;  but,  as 
it  is  written :  The  reviling  of  thy  revilers  fell  upon 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,    XV. 


299 


4  me.  (4)  For  every  thing  written  of  old,  was  written 
for  our  instruction ;  that  we,  by  |)atience  and  by  the 
consolation  of  the  scriptures,  might  possess  hope. 

6  (5)  And  may  the  God  of  patience  and  of  consola- 
tion, grant  to  you,  to  thinK  in  harmony  one  with 

6  another,  in  Jesus  Messiah;  (6)  so  that  with  one 
mind  and  one  mouth,  ye  may  glorify  God,  the 

7  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.— (7)  Wherefore, 
receive  ye  and  bear  up  one  another,  as  also  Messiah 

8  receivea  you,  to  the  glory  of  God.  (8)  Now  I  say, 
that  Jesus  Messiah  ministered  to  the  circumcision, 
in  behalf  of  the  truth  of  God,  in  order  to  confinn 

9  the  promise  [made]  to  the  fathers ;  (9)  and  that  the 
Gentiles  might  glorify  God  for  his  mercies  upon 
them,  as  it  is  written :  I  will  confess  to  thee  among 
the  Gentiles,  and  to  thy  name  will  I  sing  psalms. 

10  (10)  And  again  he  said :  Bejoice,  ye  Gentiles,  with 

11  his  people.  (11)  And  again  he  said:  Praise  the 
Lord,  all  ye  Gentiles ;  [and]  laud  him,  all  ye  na- 

12  tions.  (12)  And  again  Isaiah  said :  There  will  be 
a  root  of  Jesse ;  and  he  that  shall  arise,  will  be  a 
|)rince  for  the  Gentiles ;  and  in  him  will  the  Gen- 

18  tiles  hope. — (13)  Now  may  the  God  of  hope  fill 
you  with  all  joy  and  peace,  by  faith ;  that  ye  may 
abound  in  his  hope,  by  the  power**  of  the  Holy 
Spirit 

14  Now  I  am  persuaded,  my  Brethren,  even  I,  con* 
cerning  you ;  that  ye  too  are  full  of  goodness,  and 
are  replenished  with  all  knowledge,  and  are  able 

15  also  to  instruct  others.  (15)  Yet  I  have  written 
rather  boldly  to  you,  my  Brethren,  that  I  might 
put  vou  in  remembrance;   because  of  the  grace 

16  which  is  given  to  me  by  God,  (16)  that  I  should  be 
a  nainister  of  Jesus  Messiah  among  the  Gentiles, 
and  should  subserve  the  gospel  of  God,  that  the 
oblation^  of  the  Gentiles  might  be  acceptable,  and 

17  be  sanctified  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  (17)  I  have 
therefore  a  glorying  in  Jesus  Messiah,  before  God. 

18  (18)  Yet  I  presume  not  to  speak  of  any  thing  [done] 
for  the  obedience  of  the  Gentiles,  which  Messiah 
hath  not  wrought  by  me,  in  word  and  in  deeds, 

19  (19)  by  the  power  of  signs  and  wonders,  and  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit ;  so  that  from  Jerusa- 
lem I  have  made  a  circuit  quite  to  Illyricum,  and 
have  fulfilled  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah ; 

20  (20)  while  1  was  careful  not  to  preach  where  the 


*  or,  energy. 


sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


300 


ROMANS,  XVI. 


name  of  Messiah  had  been  invoked,  lest  I  should 
build  upon  another  man's  foundation ;  (21)  but,  as  21 
it  is  wntten :  They,  to  whom  mention  of  him  had 
not  been  made,  will  see  him ;  and  thej,  who  had 
not  heard,  will  be  obedient. — (22)  And  on  this  22 
aooounti  I  have  been  many  times  prevented  fix)m 
ooming  to  you.    (23)  But  now,  since  I  have  no  28 

!>laoe  in  these  regioni^  and  as  I  have  been  desirous 
or  many  years  past  to  come  to  you,  (24)  when  I  24 
go  to  Spain,  I  hope  to  come  and  see  you;  and  that 
ve  will  accompany  me  thither,  when  I  shall  have 
been  satisfied,  m  some  measure,  ¥rith  visiting  you. 
— (25)  But  I  am  now  going  to  Jerusalem,  to  minis-  25 
ter  to  the  saints.    (26)  For  they  of  Macedonia  and  26 
Achaia,  have  been  willing  to  make  up  a  contribu- 
tion^ for  the  needy  saints  who  are  at  Jerusalem. 
(27)  They  were  willing,  because  they  were  also  27 
debtors  to  them :  for  if  the  Gtentiles  have  been  par- 
ticipators with  them  in  the  Spirit,  they  are  debtors 
to  serve  them  also  in  things  of  the  flesh.    f28)  28 
When  therefore,  I  shall  have  accomplished  tnis, 
and  shall  have  sealed  to  them  this  fruit,  I  will  pass 
by  you  into  Spain.    (29)  And  I  know  that  when  I  29 
come  to  you,  I  shall  come  in  the  ftdlness  of  the 
blessing  of  the  gospel  of  Messiah. — (30)  And  I  80 
beseech  vou,  my  Brethren,  by  our  Lord  Jesus  Mes- 
siah, and  by  the  love  of  the  Spirit,  that  ye  labor 
with  me  in  prayer  to  Qtod  for  me ;  (31)  that  I  may  81 
be  delivered  from  them  in  Judaea,  who  believe  not ; 
and  that  the  ministration,®  which  I  carry  to  the 
saints  in  Jerusalem,  may  be  well  received ;  (32)  and  82 
that,  hj  the  good  pleasure  of  God,  I  may  come  to 
you  with  joy,  and  may  take  comfort  with  you. — 
(33)  And  may  the  God  of  peace  be  with  you  all :  88 
Amen. 


^  By.  thai  a 
eommunico' 
Hon  should  hcy 


By. 


•Sy. 


^Sy.askyeqf 
^  peace  of. 


And  I  commend  to  you  Phebe,  our  sister,  who  XVL 
is  a  servant*  of  the  church  in  Cenchrea :  (2)  that    2 
ye  may  receive  her  in  our  Lord,  as  is  just  for  saints ; 
and  that  ye  may  assist  her,  in  whatever  thing  she 
may  ask  of  you :  for  she  also  hath  been  assistant  to 
many,  and  to  me  also. — (3)  Salute^  ye  Priscilla    8 
and  Aquila,  my  fellow-laborers  in  Jesus  Messiah ;. 
(4)  who,  for  my  life,  surrendered  their  own  necks ;    4 
and  to  whom,  not  only  I  am  ffrateful,  but  also  all 
the  ohuTches  of  the  Gentiles.    (5)  And  give  a  salu-    6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ROMANS,   XVL 


301 


tation  to  the  cliurchc  which  is  in  their  house. 
Salute  my  beloved  Epenetus,  who  was  the  first- 

6  fruits  of  Achaia  in  Messiah.    (6)  Salute  Mary,  who 

7  hath  toiled  much  with  you.  (7)  Salute  Andro- 
nicus  and  Junia,  my  relatives,^  who  were  in  cap- 
tivity with  me,  and  are  of  note  among  the  legatea, 

8  and  were  in  Messiah  before  me.     f8)    Salute  Am- 

9  plias,  my  beloved  in  our  Lord.  (9)  Salute  Urbanus. 
a  laborer  with   us  in  Messiah;   and  my  beloved 

10  Stachys.  (10)  Salute  Apelles,  chosen  in  our  Lord. 
Salute  the  members®  of  the  house  of  Aristobulus. 

11  (11)  Salute  Herodion,  my  kinsman.  Salute  the 
members®  of  the  house  of  Narcissus,  who  are  in 

12  our  Lord.  (12)  Salute  Tryphena  and  Tryphosa, 
who  toil  in  our  Lord.     Salute  my  beloved  rersis, 

13  who  toiled  much  in  our  Lord.  (13)  Salute  Eufus, 
chosen  in  our  Lord;    and  his  and  my  mother. 

14  (14)  Salute  Asyncritus,  and  Phlegon,  and  Hermas, 
and  Patrobas,  and  Hermes,  and  the  brethren  who 

15  are  with  them.  (16)  Salute  Philologus  and  Julia, 
Nereus  and  his  sister,  and  Olympas,  and  all  the 

16  saints  who  are  with  them.  (16J  Salute  one  another, 
with  a  holy  kiss.  All  the  cnurches  of  Messiah 
salute  you. 

17  And  I  beseech  you,  my  Brethren,  that  ye  be- 
ware of  them  who  cause  divisions  and  stumblings 
[among  you],  aside  from  the  doctrine  which  ye 
nave  learned :   and  that  ye  stand  aloof  firom  them. 

18  (18)  For  they  who  are  such,  do  not  serve  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messiah,  but  their  own  belly :  and  by  bland 
speeches  and  good  wishes,^  they  beguile  the  hearts 

19  of  the  simple.  (19J  But  your  obedience  is  known 
to  every  one.  I  tnerefore  rejoice  in  you :  and  I 
would  have  you  be  wise  in  what  is  good,  and 

20  blameless  in  what  is  evil.  {20)  And  the  God  of 
peace  will  soon  crush  Satan  under  your  feet  The 
grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  be  with  you. 

21  Timothy,  my  fellow-laborer,  and  Lucius,  and 
Jason,   and   Sosipater,  my  kinsmen,  salute  you. 

22  (22)  I  Tertius,  who  have  written  this  epistle,  salute 

23  you  in  the  Lord.  (23)  Gains,  hospitable  to  me  and 
to  all  the  church,  saluteth  you.  Erastus,  the 
steward  of  the  city,  and  Quartus  a  brother,  salute 
you. 

26  Now  unto  Qtxi,  who  is  able  to  establish  you, — 
(according    to  my  gospel,   which    is  proclaimed 


*  Sy.  ^iIim] 


•  Sy.  «ofis. 


'  or,  benedic' 
tions. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


302 


1   CORINTHIANS,   1. 


«  By.  from  the 
times  of  ages. 


»  or,  deaconess. 


concerning  Jesus  Messiah;  and  according  to  the 
revelation  of  the  mystery,  which  was  hidden  £ix>m 
the  times  that  are  past^ff  (26)  but  is  at  this  time  26 
revealed,  by  means  of  the  scriptures  of  the  prophets; 
and  by  the  command  of  the  eternal  God,  is  made 
known  to  all  the  Gentiles,  for  the  obedience  of 
faith ;)  (27)  [to  him]  who  only  is  wise,  be  glory,  27 
through  Jesus  Messiah,  for  ever  and  ever:  Amen. 

The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  be  with  24 
you  all :  Amen.* 

End  of  the  epistle  to  the  Romans ;  which  was  written  from 
Corinth;  and  was  sent  by  the  hand  cf  Phebe^  a  fatO^ 
servant,^ 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Corinthians. 


Sy.  it^ 


'  or,  by. 


c  or^  retfelatiorL 


Paul,  called  and  sent  by  Jesus  Messiah  in  the 
good  pleasure  of  God;  and  Sosthenes,  a  brother; 
{2)  to  the  church*  of  God  which  is  at  Corinth,  to 
the  [people]  called  and  sanctified,  who  are  sanctified 
in  Jesus  Messiah ;  and  to  all  them,  in  every  place, 
who  invoke  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah, 
their  and  our  JTLord] :  (8)  Grace  [be]  with  you,  and 

Seace ;  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  our  Lord 
esus  Messiah. 

I  thank  my  God  at  all  times  on  your  behalf  for 
the  grace  of  God  which  is  given  to  you  in*>  Jesus 
Messiah ;  (5)  that  in  every  thing  ye  are  enriched 
by  him,  in  all  discourse,  and  in  all  knowledge ; 
(6)  even  as  the  testimony  of  Messiah  was  confirmed 
among  you :  (7)  so  that  ye  are  not  inferior  in  any 
one  of  his  gifts ;  but  are  waiting  for  the  manifesta- 
tion^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah:  (8)  who  will 
confirm  you  unto  the  end,  so  that  ye  may  be  blame- 


*  In  the  Syriac,  the  24th  verse  is  thus  placed  at  the  end  of  the  Ei^stle. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   CORINTHIANS,   1. 


303 


9  less  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah.  (9)  God 
is  fittthful ;  by  whom  ye  have  been  called  into^  the 
fellowship  of  his  Son,  Jesus  Messiah,  our  Lord. 

10  And  I  beseech  you,  my  Brethren,  by  the  name 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  that  to  you  all  there 
may  be  one  language ;«  and  that  there  may  be  no 
divisions  among  jrou :  but  that  ye  mav  become 
perfectly  of  one  mind,  and  of  one  way  of  thinking. 

11  (11)  For  concerning  you,  my  Brethren,  it  hath  been 
reported  to  me  by  the  house  of  Chloe,  that  there 

12  are  contentions  among  you.  (12)  And  this  I  state : 
That  one  of  you  saith,  I  am  of  Paul;  and  another 
saith,  I  am  oi  Apollos ;  and  another  saith,  I  am  of 
Cephas;    and  another    saith,  I  am  of   Messiah. 

18  (18)  Now  was  Messiah  divided?  Or  was  Paul 
crucified  for  you?     Or  were  ye  baptized  in  the 

14  name  of  Paul?  (14)  I  thank  my  God  that  I  bap- 
tized  none  of  you,  except  Crispus  and  Gains; 

15  (16)  lest  any  one  should  say,  that  1  baptized  in  my 

16  own  name..  (16)  I  moreover  baptized  the  house- 
hold^  of  Stephanas :  but  further,  1  know  not  that  I 

17  baptized  any  other. — (17)  For  Messiah  did  not  send 
me  to  baptize,  but  to  preach ;  not  with  wisdom  of 
words,  lest  the  cross  of  Messiah  should  be  inefficient. 

18  (18)  For  a  discourse  concerning  the  cross  is,  to  them 
who  perish,  foolishness;  but  to  us  who  live,?  it 

19  is  the  energy  of  God.  (19^  For  it  is  written :  I 
will  destrov  the  wisdom  or  the  wise ;  and  I  will 

20  dissipate  the  intelligence  of  the  sagacious.  (20) 
Where  is  the  wise?  Or  where  is  the  scribe?  Or 
where  is  the  disputant  of  this  world  ?  Lo,  hath  not 
God  showed,  that  the  wisdom  of  this  world  is  folly  ? 

21  (21)  For  in  the  wisdom  of  God,  because  the  world 
by  wisdom  knew  not  God,  it  pleased  God,  by  the 
foolishness  of  preaching,  to  quicken**   them  who 

22  believe.    (22)  Because  me  Jews  ask  for  signs,  and 
28  the  Gentiles'  demand  wisdom.    (28)  But  we  preach 

Messiah  as  crucified ;  [which  is]  a  stumbling-block 
to  the  Jews,   and  foolishness  to    the    Gentiles;* 

24  (24)  but  to  them  who  are  called,  both  Jews  and 
Gentiles,*  Messiah  is  the  energy  of  God,  and  the 

26  wisdom  of  God.  (25)  Because  the  foolishness  of 
God,  is  wiser  than  men  ;  and  the  feebleness  of  God, 

26  is  stronger  than  men.— (26)  For  look  also  at  your 
calling,  my  Brethren ;  that  not  many  among  you 
are  wise,  according  to  the  flesh ;    nnd  not  many 


or,  unto. 


•  or,  toordt  oft 
diseourm 


'  Sy.  home. 


K  or,  are  saved, 


*»  or,  save. 

»  Sy. 
Aramaeans. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


304 


1  CORINTHIANS,   IL 


kSy.12.acLi>l 

»Sy. 


^  Bj.  judge. 


amonff  you  are  mighty,  and  not  many  among  you 
are  of  high  birth.    (27)  But  Gbd  hath  chosen  the  27 
foolish  ones  of  the  world,  to  shame  the  wise ;  and 
he  hath  chosen  the  feeble  ones  of  the  world,  to 
shame  the  mighty ;  (28)  and  he  hath  chosen  those  28 
of  humble  birth  in  the  world,  and  the  despised,  and 
them  who  are  nothing,  to  bring  to  naught  them 
who  are  something:  (29)  so  that  no  flesh  might  29 
fflory  before  him.    (30)  And  ye,  moreover,  are  of  80 
him  in  Jesus  Messiah;    who  hath  become  to  us 
wisdom  from  God,  and  righteousness^  and  sanctifi- 
cation,!  and  redemption  :>»  (31)  according  to  that  81 
which  is  written :  He  that  glorieth,  let  hun  glory 
in  the  Lord. 


2 


6 


And  I,  my  Brethren,  when  I  came  to  you,  did  EL 
not  preach  to  you  the  mystery  of  God  in  mamifi- 
cent  speech,  nor  in  wisdom.*  (2)  And  I  did  not 
govern**  myself  among  you,  as  if  i  faiew  any  thing, 
except  only  Jesus  Messiah ;  and  him  also  as  cru- 
cified. (3^  And  in  much  fear  and  much  trembling, 
was  I  witn  you.  (4)  And  my  speech  and  my 
preaching  were  not  with  the  persuasiveness  of  the 
discourses  of  wisdom  ;  but  with  the  demonstration 
of  the  Spirit,  and  with  power :  (5)  that  your  feith 
might  not  arise  from  the  wisdom  of  men,  but  from 
the  power  of  God. — (6)  Yet  we  do  speak  wisdom,® 
among  the  perfect ;  the  wisdom  not  of  this  world, 
nor  of  the  potentates^  of  this  world,  who  will  come 
to  naught.  (7)  But  we  speak  the  wisdom  of  Gt)d, 
in  a  mystery ;  the  wisdom  which  was  hidden,  and 
which  God  predetermined  before  the  world  was, 
for  our  glory :  (8)  which  no  one  of  the  potentates 
of  this  world  knew ;  for  had  they  known  it,  they 
would  not  have  crucified  the  Lord  of  glory. 
(9)  But,  as  it  is  written :  The  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  hath  the  ear  heard,  nor  hath  it  entered  into  the 
heart  of  man,  that  which  God  hath  prepared  for 
those  who  love  him.  (10)  But  God  hath  revealed 
it  to  us,  by  his  Spirit ;  for  the  Spirit  exploreth  all 
things,  even  the  profound  things  of  God.  (11)  For  11 
what  man  is  there,  who  knoweth  that  which  is  in  a 
man,  except  it  be  the  spirit  of  the  man,  which  is  in 
him  ?  So  also,  that  which  is  in  God,  no  one  know- 
eth, except  the  Spirit  of  God.  (12)  Now  we  have 
received,  not  the  spirit  of  the  worl4  but  the  Spirit 


8 


9 


10 


12 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,   III. 


305 


Sy. 

Gr.  iy  •]^\)'xji 


Sy.VLwOT 
-Sy.|j;^ 

Sy.  irrs^^ 


which  is  fipom  Gbd;  that  we  might  know  the  free 

18  gifla,  which  are  given  to  us  by  God.     (13)  Which 

thin^  we  also  spneak;  not  in  the  teaching  of  the 

words  of  man's  wisdom,  but  in  the  teaching  of  the 

Spirit;  and  we  compare  spirituals  with  spirituals. 

14  (14)  For  a  man  in  his  natural  self,®  receiveth  not 

spirituals ;  for  they  are  foolishness  to  him.   Neither 

can  he  know  them ;  for  they  are  discerned  by  the 

16  Si)irit.    (15)  But  he  that  is  spiritual,  judgeth  of  all 

16  tnings:  and  he  is  judged  of  by  no  one.    (16)  For 

who  hath  known  the  n^d  of  the  Lord,  that  he 

should  instruct  him  ?    But  we  have  the  mind  of 

Messiah. 


in.  And  I,  my  Brethren,  could  not  talk  with  you,  as 
with  spiritual^  [persons],  but  as  with  the  carnal, '^ 

2  as  with  babe»  in  Messiah.  (2)  I  gave  you  milk, 
and  did  not  give  you  solid  food :  for  ye  were  not 
then  able  to  receive  it;  and  even  now,  ye  are  not 

8  able.  (3)  For  ye  are  still  in  the  flesh.c  Por,  as 
there  are  among  you  envying,  and  contention,  and 
parties,  are  ye  not  carnal,  and  walking  in  the  flesh? 

4  (4)  For,  while  one  of  vou  saith,  I  am  of  Paul ;  and 
another  saith,  I  am  of  ApoUos;  are  ye  not  carnal? 

5  —(5)  For,  who  is  Paul,  or  who  is  ApoUos,  but  the 
ministers  by  whom  ye  believed,  each  one  as  the 

6  Lord  gave  to  him?     (6)  I  planted,  and  ApoUos 

7  watered ;  but  God  produced  the  growth.  (7)  Not 
therefore  he  that  planted,  is  to  be  accounted  of,  nor 
he  that  watered,  but  God  who  produced  the  growth. 

8  (8)  And  he  that  planted,  ana  he  that  watered  are 
on  a  par  ;^  each  receiveth  his  reward,  according  *  Sy.  are  one, 

9  to  his  labor.    (9)  For  we  labor  with  God :  and  ye 

10  are  God's  husbandry,  and  God's  edifice.  (10)  Ac- 
cording to  the  grace  of  God  which  was  given  me,  I 
laid  the  foundation  like  a  wise  architect;  and 
another  buildeth  on  it.    But  let  each  one  see,  how 

11  he  buildeth  on  it.  (11)  For  any  other  foundation 
can  no  man  lay,  different  from  that  which  is  laid, 

12  which  is  Jesus  Messiah.  (12)  And  if  any  one 
buildeth  on  this  foundation,  either  gold,  or  silver, 
or  precious  stones,  or  wood,  or  hay,  or  stubble ; 

18  (18)  the  work  of  each  will  be  exposed  to  view ;  for 
the  day  will  expose  it ;  because  it  is  to  be  tested  by 
fire ;  and  the  fire  will  disclose  the  work  of  each,  of 

14  what  sort  it  is.    (14)  And  that  builder  whose  work 

20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


806 


1  CORINTHIANS,   IV, 


><^^Vi^ 


shall  endure,  will  receive  his  reward,    (15)  And  15 
he,  whose  work  shall  bum  up,  will  suffer  loss; 
yet  himself  will  escape ;  but  it  will  be,  as  from 
the  fire. — (16)  Know  ye  not,  that  ye  are  the  temple  16 
of  God  ?  and  that  the  Spirit  of  God  dwelleth  in 
you  ?    (17)  Whoever  shall  mar  the  temple  of  Gtod^  17 
God  will  mar  him :  for  the  temple  of  Grod  is  holy, 
which  [temple]  ye  are.     (18)  Let  no  one  deceive  18 
himself.     W  hoever  among  you  thinketh  that  he  is 
wise  in  this  world,  let  him  become  a  fool,  that  he 
mav  be  wise,    n.9)  For  the  wisdom  of  this  world  19 
is  fatuity  with  Uod :  fortt  is  written,  He  catcheth 
the  wise  in  their  own  craftitiess.    (20)  And  again :  20 
The  Lord  knoweth  the  devices  of  the  wise,  that 
they  are  vain.     (21]j  Wherefore,  let  no  one  glory  21 
in  men:  for  all  things  are  yours;   (22)  whether  22 
Paul,  or  Apollos,  or  Cephas,  or  the  world,  or  life, 
or  death,  or  things  present,  or  things  to  come ;  all 
things  are  yours :  (23)  and  ye  are  Messiah's,  and  28 
Messiah  is  God's. — [I  v .]  Let  us  be  so  accounted  IV. 
of  by  you,  as  the  servants*  of  Messiah,  and  the 
stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God.    (2)  Now  it  is    2 
required  of  stewards,  that  each  be  found  faithful. 
(8)  But  to  me,  it  is  a  light  matter  to  be  judged  of     8 
by  you,  or  by  any  man  whatever;^ nay,  I  am  no 
judge  of  myself.     (4)  (For  I  am  not  conscious  in    4 
myself  of  any  thing  [flagrant] ;  yet  I  am  not  by 
this  justified ;  for  the  Lord  is  my  judge.)   (5)  There-    5 
fore  pronounce  not  judgments  before  tne  time,  [or] 
until  the  Lord  come,  who  will  pour  light  upon  the 
hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  will  make  manifest 
the  thoughts  of  [men's]  hearts :  and  then  will  each 
one  have  [due]  praise  from  God. 

These  things,  my  Brethren,  I  have  stated  con-  6 
oerning  the  person  of  myself  and  of  Apollos,  for 
your  sakes;  that,  in  us,  ye  might  learn  not  to 
think  [of  men],  ^bove  what  is  written ;  and  that 
no  one  might  exalt  himself  in  comparison  with  his 
fellow,  on  account  of  any  person.  (7)  For  who  7 
exploreth  thee?  Or  what  hast  thou,  which  thou 
didst  not  receive  ?  And  if  thou  receivedst  it,  why 
ffloriest   thou,   as  if   thou  didst  not  receive  it? 

(8)  Now  ye  are  yourselves  fiill,  and  enriched ;  and,     8 
without  us,  are  on  thrones  I     And  I  wish  ye  were 
enthroned;   that  we  also  might  reign  with  you. 

(9)  But  I  suppose,  that  God  hath  placed  us  legates    9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,    V. 


307 


the  last|  as  for  death ;   since  we  have  become  a 
roectacle  to  the  world,  to  angels  and  to  men. 

10  (10)  We  are  fools,  on  account  of  Messiah ;  but  ye 
are  wise  in  Messiah  I     We  are  feeble ;  but  ye  are 

11  strong !  Ye  are  lauded,  we  are  contemned.  (11) 
Unto  this  hour,  we  hunger,  and  thirst,  and  are 
naked,  and  are  buffeted,  and  have  no  permanent 

12  home:  (12)  and  we  toil,  working  with  our  own 
hands :  they  defame  us,  and  we  bless .  they  persecute 

18  us,  and  we  endure  it :  (13)  they  revile  us,  and  we 
entreat  them :  we  are  as  the  filth  of  the  world,  and 

14  the  expiation  for  all  men,  up  to  this  time.— (14)  I 
write  these  things,  not  to  shame  you ;  but  I  instruct 

15  you,  as  dear  children.  (15)  For  though  ye  have 
a  myriad  of  teachers  in  Messiah,  yet  not  many 
fethers ;  for  in  Jesus  Messiah,  I  have  begotten  you 

16  by  preaching.**     (16)  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  that 

17  ye  DC  like  me. — (17)  For  this  cause  have  I  sent  to 
you  Timothy,  who  is  my  beloved  son,  and  faithftd 
m  the  Lord,  that  he  might  bring  to  your  recollection 
my  ways  in  Messiah,  agreeably  to  what  I  teach  in 

18  all  the  churches.  (18)  Now  some  of  you  are  in- 
flated, as  though  I  would  not  [dare]  come  to  you. 

19  (19)  But  I  will  come  to  you  speedily,  if  God  be 
willing :  and  I  will  know, — not  the  speech*'  of  them 

20  who  exalt  themselves,  but- their  power:  (20)  for 
the  kingdom  of  God  is  not  in  word,  but  in  power. 

21  (21)  What  will  ye?  Shall  I  come  to  you  with 
the  rod,  or  with  love  and  a  gentle  spirit? 

V.  In  short,  a  it  is  reported,  there  is  whoredom 
among  you ;  and  such  whoredom  as  is  not  even 
named  among  the  heathen,  that  a  son  should  even 

2  take  the  wife  of  his  father.  (2)  And  ye  are  infla- 
ted, and  have  not  rather  sitten  down  in  grief,  that 
he  who  hath  done  this  deed  might  be  separated 

8  from  you.  (3)  And  I,  while  distant  from  you  in 
body  but  present  with  you  in  spirit,  have  already, 
as  if  present,  judged  him  who  perpetrateth  this 

4  deed;  (4)  that  ye  all  assemble  together,  in  the 
name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Messiah,  and  I  with  you 
in  spirit,  together  with  the  energy**  of  our  Lord 

5  Jesus  Messiah ;  (5)  and  that  ye  deliver  him  over 
to  Satan,!  for  the  destruction  of  the  flesh,  ^  that  in 
spirit  he  may  have  life,  in  the  day  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Messian. 


or,  the  (rogpeL 


•  Qy.word. 


Sy.]a£D 


Sy.  aT\*.»» 
or,  body. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


308 


1  CORINTHIANS,   YL 


'Sy. 


'alii:  unleav- 
ened. 


'  ofy  mched  pet' 
son. 


Your  glorying  is  not  praiseworthy.^    Know  ye 
not,  that  a  little  leaven  leaveneth  the  whole  mass? 

(7)  Purge-  out  from  you  the  old  leaven,  that  ye 
may  be  a  new  mass,  as  ye  are  unleJtvened.  Eor 
our  passover  is  the  Messiah,  who  was  slain  for  us. 

(8)  Therefore  let  us  celebrate  the  festival,  not  with 
the  old  leaven,  nor  with  the  leaven  of  wickedness 
and  bitterness,  but  with  the  leaven«  of  purity  and 
sanctity.— {9)  I  wrote  to  you  by  letter,  not  to  com- 
mingle with  whoremongers.  (10)  But  I  say  not, 
with  the  whoremongers  who  are  m  the  world,  nor 
[speak  I]  of  the  avaricious,  or  of  the  rapacious,  or 
of  the  idol-worshippers,  otherwise  ye  would  be 
obliged  to  go  out  of  the  world.  (11)  But  this  is 
what  I  wrote  to  you,  that  ye  commingle  not,  if  any 
one  is  called  a  "brother,  and  is  a  whoremonger,  or 
avaricious,  or  an  idol-worshipper,  or  a  railer,  or  a 
drunkard,  or  rapacious, — with  him  who  is  such, 
not  even  to  eat  bread.  (12)  For  what  business  12 
have  I  to  judge  them  who  are  without?  But 
those  within  the  body,  judge  ye,  (13)  and  those 
without,  Q-od  judgeth ;  and  remove  ye  the  wicked- 
ness^ from  among  you. 


8 


9 
10 


11 


13 


2 


S 


Dare  any  of  you,  when  he  hath  a  controversy  YL 
with  his  brother,  litigate  before  the  iniquitous,  and 
not  before  the  sanctified  ?  (2)  Or  know  ye  not, 
that  the  sanctified  will  judge  the  world  ?»  And  if 
the  world  will  be  judged  by  you,  are  ye  unfit  to 
decide  trivial  causes?  (3)  Know  ye  not,  that  we 
shall  judge  angels  ?^  How  much  more  things  that 
are  of  the  world  ?  (4)  But  if  ye  have  a  controversy 
about  a  worldly  matter,  seat  ye  on  the  bench  for 
you  those  who  are  contemned  in   the   church  1 

(5)  For  shame  to  you*  I  say  [it].  So,  there  is  not 
even  one  wise  man  among  you,  who  is  competent 
to  do  equity  between  a  brother  and  his  brother : 

(6)  but  a  brother  litigateth  with  his  brother,  and 
also  before  them  that  believe  not  1  (7)  Now  there- 
fore ye  condemn  yourselves,  in  that  ye  have  litiga- 
tion one  with  another.  For  why  do  ye  not  rather 
suffer  wrong?  why  not  rather  be  defrauded? 
'8)  But  ye  yourselves  commit  wrong,  and  ye  de- 
raud  even  your  brethren.    (9)  Or  do  ye  not  know, 

that  the  unrighteous  will  not  inherit  the  kingdom 
of  God?    Do  not  mistake:  neither  whoremongersi 


6 

7 


8 
9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,    VII. 


309 


nor  idol-worshipipers,  nor  adulterers,  nor  debau- 

10  chees,  nor  Hers  with  males,  (10)  nor  the  avaricious, 
nor  thieves,  nor  drunkards,  nor  railers,  nor  extor- 

11  tioners, — will  inherit  the  kingdom  of  God.  fll) 
And  these  things  have  been  in  some  of  you :  but 
ye  are  washed,  and  are  sanctified,  and  made  righ- 
teous, in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
and  by  the  Spirit  of  our  Gk>d. 

12  Every  thing  is  in  my  power :«  but  every  thing  is 
not  profitable  to  me.  Every  thing  is  in  my  power ; 
but  none  [of  them]  shall  have  dominion  over  me. 

13  (13)  Food  is  for  the  belly;  and  the  belly  is  for 
food;  but  God  will  bring  them  both  to  naught. 
But  the  body  is  not  for  whoredom,  but  for  our 

14  Lord ;  and  our  Lord  for  the  body.  (14)  And  God 
hath  raised  up  our  Lord ;  and  he  will  raise  us  up, 

15  by  his  power.  {15)  Know  ye  not,  that  your  bodies 
are  the  members  or  the  Messiah  ?  Shall  one  take 
a  member  of  the  Messiah,  and  make  it  the  member 

16  of  a  harlot  ?  Far  be  it  (16)  Or  know  ye  not, 
that  whoever  joineth  himself  to  a  harlot,  is  one  body 
[with  her]  ?     For  it  is  said.  They  twain  shall  lie 

17  one  body.    (17)  But  he  that  joineth  himself  to  our 

18  Lord,  is  with  him  one  spirit.  (18)  Flee  whoredom. 
For  every  [other]  sin  which  a  man  committeth,  is 
external  to  his  body;   but  he  that  committeth 

19  whoredom,  sinneth  against  his  own  body.  (19)  Or 
know  ye  not,  that  your  body  is  the  temple  of  the 
Holy  Spirit  who  abideth*^  in  you,  whom  ye  have 
receivea  from  God  ?     And  ye  are  not  your  own. 

20  (20)  For  ye  are  bought®  with  a  price.  Therefore, 
glorify  ye  God,  with  your  body,  and  with  your 
spirit,  which  are  God's. 

VIL  And  concerning  the  things  of  which  ye  wrote  to 
me,  it  is  praiseworthy^  for  a  man  not  to  approach 

2  a  woman.  (2)  But,  on  account  of  whoredom,  let 
each  have  his  own  wife ;  and  let  a  woman  have 

8  her  own  husband.  (3)  And  let  the  man  render 
to   his  wife   the  kindness  which  is  due;    and  so 

4  also  the  woman  to  her  husband.  (4)  The  woman 
is  not  the  sovereign^  over  her  body,  but  her  hus- 
band :  so  also  the  man  is  not  the  sovereign  over 

5  his  body,  but  the  wife.  (5)  Therefore,  deprive  not 
one  another,  except  when  ye  both  consent,  at  the 
time  ye  devote  yourselves  to  &sting  and  prayer ; 


*  Sy. 


*  By.  l^iDl^ 

Sy. 


Sy. 


Sy.l4A^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


310 


1   CORINTHIANS,    VIL 


«  Sy. 


«  Sy 


*  Sy.  IJil 


and  return  again  to  the  same  disposition,  that  Satan 
tempt  you  not  because  of  the  concupiscence  of 
your  tody.    (6)  But  this  I  say,  as  to  weak  per-     6 
sons,  not  of  positive  precept.®     ^7)  For  I  would     7 
that  all  men  might  be  like  me  in  purity.     But 
every  man  is  endowed  with  his  gift  of  Grod ;  one 
thus,  and  another  so.    (8)  And  I  say  to  them  who    8 
have  no  wives,  and  to  widows,  that  it  is  advanta- 
geous to  them  to  remain  as  I  am.     (9)  But  if  they    9 
cannot  endure  [it],  let  them  marrv :  for  it  is  more 
profitable  to  take  a  wife,  than  to  burn  with  concu- 
piscence.   (10)  And  on  them  who  have  wives,  I  10 
enjoin,— not  I,  but   my  Lord, — jthat  the  woman 
separate  not  from  her  husband.     (1-1)  And  if  she  11 
separate,  let  her  remain  without  a  husband,  or  be 
reconciled  to  her  husband;  and  let  not  the  man 
put  away  his  wife.    (12])  And  to  the  rest,  say  I, —  12 
I,  not  my  Lord, — that  if  there  be  a  brother,  who 
hath  a  wife  that  believeth  not,  and  she  is  disposed 
to  dwell  with   him,  let  him  not  put  her  away. 
(13)  And  that  woman,  who  hath  a  husband  that  13 
believeth  not,  and  he  is  disposed  to  dwell  with  her, 
let  her  not  forsake  her  husband.     (14)  For  the  14 
husband  who   believeth  not,  is  sanctified  by  the 
wife  that  believeth;  and  the  wife  who  believeth 
not,  is  sanctified  by  the  husband  that  believeth: 
otherwise  their  chiloren  would  be  impure ;  but  now 
are  they  pure.<^     (15)  But  if  the  unbeliever  sepa-  15 
rateth,  let  him  separate :  A  brother  or  sister  is  n5t  in 
bondage  in  such  cases :  it  is  to  peace,  God  hath  called 
us.     (16)  For  how  knowest  tnou,  O  wife,  whether  16 
thou  wilt  procure  life®  to  thy  husband  ?      Or,  thou 
husband,  knowest  thou,  whether  thou  wilt  procure 
life^  to  thy  wife?    (17)  Every  one,  however,  as  17 
the  Lord  hath  distributed  to  iiim,  and  every  one  as 
God  hath  called  him,  so  let  him  walk.     And  also 
thus  I  enjoin  upon  all  the  churches.     (18)  Is  a  cir-  18 
cumcised  person  called,  let  him  not  revert  to  uncir- 
cumcision :  and  if  one  uncircumcised  be  called,  let 
him  not  become  circumcised.     (19)   For  circum-  19 
cision  is  nothing,  neither  is  uncircumcision ;  but  the 
keeping  of  God's  commands.     (20)  Let  every  one  20 
continue  in  the  vocation,  in  which  he  was  called. 
(21)  If  thou  wert  called,  being  a  servant ;  let  it  not  21 
trouble  thee.     But  if  thou  canst  be  made  free, 
choose  it  rather  than  to  serve.    (22)  For  he  that  22 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,  VII. 


311 


is  called  by  our  Lord,  being  a  servant,  is  God's 

freedman :  likewise,  he  that  is  called,  being  a  free 

28  man,  is  the  Messiah's  servant.     (23)  Ye  are  bought 

with  a  price;  become  not  the  servants  of  men. 

24  ^)  Let  every  one.  my  Brethren,  continue  with 
God,  in  whatever  [state]  he  was  called. 

25  And  concerning  virginity,  I  have  no  precept 
from  God ;  but  I  give  counsel,  as  a  man  who  hath 
obtained    mercy  from    God    to    be    a    believer. 

26  (26)  And  I  think  this  is  suitable,8r  on  account  of 
the  necessity  of  the  times ;  it  is  advantageous  for  a 

27  man  to  remain  as  he  is.  (27)  Art  thou  bound  to  a 
wife?    Seek  not  .a  release.     Art  thou  free  from  a 

28  wife  ?  Seek  not  a  wife.  (28)  But  if  thou  takest 
a  wife,  thou  sinnest  not.  And  if  a  maiden  is  given 
to  a  husband,  she  sinneth  not.  But  they  who  are 
such,  will  have  trouble  in  the  body :  but  I  am  for- 

29  bearing  to  you.  (29)  And  this  I  say,  my  Brethren, 
that  the  time  to  come  is  short ;  so  that  they  who 

30  have  wives,  should  be  as  if  they  had  none ;  (30)  and 
they  who  weep,  as  if  they  wept  not ;  and  they  who 
rejoice,  as  if  they  rejoiced  not ;  and  they  who  buy, 

31  as  if  they  acquired  not;  (31)  and  those  occupied 
with  this  world,  not  going  bevond  the  just  using : 
for  the  fashion^   of  this  world  is  passing  away. 

32  (32)  And  therefore  I  wish  you  to  be  without 
solicitude.  For  he  who  hath  not  a  wife,  consider* 
eth  the  things  of  his  Lord,  how  he  may  please  hm 

88  Lord.  (33)  And  he  who  hath  a  wife,  is  anxious 
about  the  world,  how  he  may  please  his  wife. 

34  (34)  There  is  a  difference  also  between  a  wife  and 
a  maiden.  She  who  is  without  a  husband,  think 
eth  of  things  pertaining  to  her  Lord,  that  she  may 
be  holy  in  her  body  and  in  her  spirit.  But  she 
who  hath  a  husband,  thinketh  of  things  pertaininff 
to  the  world,  how  she  may  please  her  husband. 

85  (36)  And  this  I  say  for  your  advantage ;  I  am  not 
laying  a  snare  for  you ;  but  that  ve  may  be  faith- 
ful towards  your  Lord,  in  a  suitable  manner,  while 

i6  not  minding  worldly  things.  (36)  But  if  any  one 
thinketh  that  there  is  reproach,  on  account  of  his 
maiden  [daughter],  because  she  hath  passed  her 
time,  and  he  hath  not  presented  her  to  a  husband, 
[and]  it  be  fitting  that  he  present  her;  let  him  do 
what  he  desireth,  he  sinneth  not;  let  her  be  mar- 

37  ried.     (37)   But  he  who  hath  firmly  determined 


Sy.l 


Sy. 

=Gr.  (fj^fira 


Digitized  by 


Google 


312 


1   CORINTHIANS,    VIII. 


i  8y.  {.ajOj* 

(.i^L*,  or, 
more  coiti- 
mendably. 


*•  1,  e,  eonscien- 


tiouify. 


bSy. 


in  his  own  mind,  and  nothing  compelleth  him,  and 
he  can  act  his  own  pleasure,  and  he  so  judgeth  in 
his  heart,  that  he  keep  his  maiden  [daughter], 
he  doeth  commendably.»     (38)  And  therefore,  he  38 
who  presenteth  his  maiden  [daughter],  doeth  com- 
menaably ;  and  he  who  presenteth  not  his  maiden 
[daughter],  doeth  very  commendably.^     (89)  A  89 
woman,  while  her  husband  liveth,  is  bound  by  the 
law ;  but  if  her  husband  sleepeth  [in  death],  she  is 
free  to  marry  whom  she  pleaseth,  [yet]  only  in  the 
Lord.    (40)  But  she  is  happier,  in  my  opinion,  if  40 
she  remain  so :  and  I  think  also,  that  I  have  the 
Spirit  of  God. 

And  concerning  sacrifices  to  idols,  we  know,  VITL 
that  in  all  of  us  there  is  knowledge ;  and  knowledge 
inflateth,  but  love  edifieth.    (2)  And  if  any  one    2 
thinketh  that  he  knoweth  any  thing,  he  knoweth 
nothing  yet,  as  he  ought  to  know  [it].    (8)  But  if     8 
any  one  loveth  God,  that  man  is  known  of  him. 
(4)  As  to  the  eating  of  the  sacrifices  of  idols,  there-    4 
fore,  we  know  that  an  idol  is  nothing  in  the  world; 
and  that  there  is  no  other  God,  but  one.     (5)  For    6 
although  there  are  what  are  called  gods,  Y'^hether 
in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  (as  there  are  gods  many. 


and  lords  many,)  (6)  yet  to  us,  on  our  part,  there 
Blather,  from  whom  are  all  things, 


6 


is  one  Qt)d,  the  , 

and  we  in  him ;  and  one  Lord,  Jesus  the  Messiah,' 

by  whom  are  all  things,  and  we  also  by  him, 

(7)  But  there  is  not  [this]  knowledge  in   every    7 
man ;  for  there  are  some,  who,  to  the  present  time, 

in  their  conscience,*  eat  [it]  as  an  offering  to  idols ; 
and  because  their  conscience  is  weak,  it  is  defiled. 

(8)  But  food  doth  not  bring  us  near  to  God ;  for  if     8 
we  eat,  we  do  not  abound;  and  if  we  eat  not,  we 
are  not  in  want    (9)  See  to  it,  however,  lest  this    9 
your  authority'>  b«3ome  a  stumbling-block  to  the 
weak.    (10)  For  if  one  should  see  thee  in  whom  10 
there  is  knowledge,  reclining  in  the  temple  of  idols, 
will  not  his  conscience,  seeing  he  is  a  weak  person, 

be  encouraged  to  eat  what  is  sacrified  ?     (11)  And  11 
by  thy  knowledge,  he  who  is  feeble,  and  on  account 
of  whom  the  Messiah  died,  will  perish.    (12)  And  12 
if  ye  thus  sin  against  your  brethren,  and  wound 
the  consciences  of  the  feeble,  ye  sin  against  the 
Messiah.    (18)  Wherefore,  if  food  is  a  stumbling-  18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS  IX. 


313 


block  to  my  brother,  I  will  for  ever  eat  no  flesh, 
lest  I  should  be  a  stumbling-block  to  my  brother. 

EX.  Am  I  not  a  free  man  ?  Or,  am  I  not  a  legate  ?« 
Or,  have  I  not  seen  Jesus  Messiah  our  Lord  r     Or, 

2  have  ye  not  been  my  work  in  my  Lord  ?  (2)  And 
if  I  have  not  been  a  legate  to  others,  yet  I  have 
been  so  to  you ;  and  ye  are  the  seal  of  my  ^egate- 

3  ship.      (3)   And  [my]  apology  to  my  judgers,  is 

4  this:  (4)  Have  we  not  authority,^  to  eat  and  to 

5  drink?  (5)  Or  have  we  not  authority  to  carry 
.  about  with  us  a  sister  as  a  wife ;  just  as  the  other 

legates,  and  the  brothers  of  our  Lord,  and  as  Ce- 

6  phas  ?    (6)  Or  I  only,  and  Barnabas,  have  we  no 

7  right  to  forbear  labor  ?  (7)  Who,  that  serveth  in 
war,  [doth  so]  at  his  own  expense  ?  Or  who,  that 
planteth  a  vineyard,  eateth  not  of  its  fruits  ?  Or 
who,  that  tendeth  dieep,  eateth  not  of  the  milk 

8  of  his  flocks?     (8)    Is  it  as  a  man,  I  say  these 

9  things  ?  Behold,  the  law  also  saith  them.  (9)  For 
it  is  written  in  the  law  of  Moses,  Thou  shalt  not 
muzzle  the  ox  that  thresheth.<^    Hath  God  regard 

10  for  oxen  ?  (10)  But  manifest  it  is,  for  whose  sake 
he  said  it.  And  indeed,  for  our  sakes  it  was  writ- 
ten :  because  the  plougher  ought  to  plough  in  hope, 

11  and  the  thresher  m  hope  of  fruit.  (11)  if  we  have 
sowed  among  you  the  things  of  the  Spirit,  is  it  a 

Seat  matter,  if  we  reap  from  you  the  things  of 
e  body  ?  (X2)  And  if  others  have  this^  preroga- 
tive^ over  you,  doth  it  not  belong  still  more  to  us? 
Yet  we  have  not  used  this  prerogative;  but  we 
have  endured  every  thing,  that  we  might  in  noth- 
ing impede  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah. 
18  (18)  Know  ye  not,  that  they  who  serve  in  a  tem- 
ple,** are  fed  from  the  temple?  And  they  who 
serve  at  the    altar,  participate  with   the  altar? 

14  (14)  Thus  also  hath  our  Lord  commanded,  that 
they  who  proclaim  his  gospel,  should  live  by  his 

15  gospel.  (15)  But  I  have  used  none  of  these  things : 
and  I  write  not,  that  it  may  be  so  done  to  me ;  for 
it  would  be  better  for  me  to  actually  die,  than  that 

16  any  one  should  make  void  my  glorying.  (16) 
For  while  I  preach,  I  have  no  [ground  of]  glory- 
ing ;  because  necessity  is  laid  upon  me,  and  woe 

17  to  me,  if  I  preach  not  (17)  For  if  I  do  this  vol- 
untarily, there  is  a  reward  for  me :  but  if  involun- 


Sj. 


Sy.,5i\» 


treadetk 


^Sy.U^loj 


Sy.  a  holy 
hou8€. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


314 


1  CORINTHIANS,   X. 


'Sy. 


Sy.W 


"Sy. 

^  or,  mind. 


*  Sy.  OjSa^ 


•Sy. 
Gr.  ^vfog. 


tarily,  a  stewardship  is  intrusted  to  me.    (18)  What  18 
then  is  my  reward  r     pt  is,]  that  when  I  preach,  I . 
make  the  announcement  of  the  Messiah  without 
cost,  and  use  not  the  prerogative  given  me  in  the 
gospel/     (19)  Being  free  from  them  all,  I  have  19 
made  myself  servant  to  everv  man ;  that  I  might 
gain  many :  (20)  and  with  the  Jews,  I  was  as  a  20 
Jew,  that  I  mignt  gain  the  Jews ;  and  with  those 
under  the  law,  I  was  as  under  the  law,  that  I  might 
gain  them  who  are  under  the  law;   (21)   and  to  21 
those  who  have  not  the  law,  I  was  as  without  the 
law,  (although  I  am  not  without  law  to  God,  but 
under  the  law  of  the  Messiah,)  that  I  might  gain 
them  that  are  without  the  law.    (22)  I  was  with  22 
the  weak,  as  weak,  that  I  might  gain  the  weak :  I 
was  all  things  to  all  men,  that-  I  might  vivifyfir 
every  one.     (23)  And  this  I  do,  that  I  may  par-  23 
ticipate  in  the  announcement.— (24)  Know  ye  not,  24 
that  they  who  run  in  the  stadium,  run  all  oi  them ; 
yet  it  is  one  who  gaineth  the  victory.     Run  ye,  so 
as  to  attain.    (25)  For  every  one  who  engageth  in  25 
the  contest,^  restraineth  his  desires*  in  every  thing. 
And  they  run,  to  obtain  a  crown  that  perisheth ; 
but  we,  one  that  perisheth  not     (26)  I  tnerefore  so  26 
run,  not  as  for  something  unknown;    and  I  so 
struggle,  not  as  struggling  against  air:*^  (27)  but  27 
I  subdue  my  body,  and  reduce  it  to  servitude ;  lest, 
when  I  have  preached  to  others,  I  myself  should 
be  a  reprobate. 


And,  my  Brethren,  I  would  have  you  know,  that  X, 
our  fathers  were  all  of  them  under  the  cloud,  and 
they  all  passed  through  the  sea;  (2)  and  they 
were  all  oaptized*  by  Moses,  in  the  cloud  and  in 
the  sea;  (3)  and  they  all  ate  the  same  spiritual 
food;  (4)  and  they  all  drank  the  same  spiritual 
drink ;  for  they  drank  from  the  spiritual  rock  that 
attended  them,  and  that  rock  was  the  Messiah. 
(5)  But  with  a  multitude  of  them,  God  was  not 
pleased ;  for  they  fell  in  the  wilderness.  (6)  Now 
these  things  were  an  example^  for  us,  that  we 
should  not  hanker  after  evil  things  as  they  hank- 
ered. (7)  Neither  should  we  serve  idols,  as  some 
of  them  served ;  as  it  is  written.  The  people  sat 
down  to  eat  and  to  drink,  and  rose  up  to  sport. 
(8)  Neither  let  us  commit  whoredom,  as  some  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   CORINTHIANS,   X 


816 


them  committed ;  and  there  fell  in  one  day  twenty 

9  and  three  thousand.     (9)  Neither  let  us  tempt  the 

Messiah,  as  some  of  them  tempted ;  and  serpents 

10  destroyed  them.  (10)  Neither  murmur  ye,  as  some 
of  them  murmured;    and  they  perished  by  the 

11  destroy er.c  (11)  All  these  things  which  befell 
them,  were  for  an  example  to  us;  and  they  are 
written  for  our  instruction,  on  whom  the  end  of  the 

12  world^  hath  come.    (12)  Wherefore,  let  him  who 
18  thinketh  he  standeth,  beware  lest  he  fall.     (18)  No 

trial  Cometh  on  you,  but  what  pertaineth  to  men : 
and  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  permit  you  to  be 
tried  beyond  your  ability,  but  will  make  an  issue 
to  your  trial,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  sustain  it. — 

Wherefore,  my  Beloved,  flee  from  idolatry. 

I  speak  as  to  the  wise ;  judge  ye  what  I  say. 

The  cup  of  thanksgiving  which  we  bless,  is  it 

the  communion  of  the  blood  of  the  Messiah  ? 
And  the  bread  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the  com- 
munion of  the  body  of  the  Messiah?  (17)  As 
therefore  that  bread  is  one,  so  we  are  all  one  body ; 
for  we  all  take  to  ourselves  from  that  one  bread. 
(18)  Behold  the  Israel  who  are  in  the  flesh ;  are 
not  they  who  eat  the  victims,  j)articipators  of  the 
altar  ?  (19)  What  then  do  I  say  ?  That  an  idol  is 
any  thing  ?   Or,  that  an  idoFs  sacrifice  is  any  thing  ? 

20  No.  (20)  But  that  what  the  Gentiles  sacrifice,  they 
sacrifice  to  demons,®  and  not  to  God.   And  I  would 

21  not,  that  ye  should  be  associates  of  demons.  (21)  Ye 
cannot  drink  the  cup  of  our  Lord,  and  the  cup  of 
demons ;  and  ye  cannot  be  partakers  at  the  table 
of  our  Lord,  and  at  the  table  of  demons.  (22)  Or, 
would  we  sedulously  provoke  our  Lord's  jealousy  ? 
Are  we  stronger  than  he  ? 

28  Every  thing  is  in  my  power  ;f  but  every  thing 
is  not  profitable.     Every  thing  is  in  my  power; 

^  but  every  thing  doth  not  edify.  (24)  Let  no  one 
seek  his  own  things,  but  also  the  things  of  his 
fellow-man.  (25)  Whatever  is  sold  in  the  flesh- 
market,  eat  ye,  without  an  inquiry  on  account  of 
oonsdenoe :  (26)  for  the  earth  is  the  Lord's,  in  its 
fullness.  (27)  And  if  one  of  the  Gentiles  invite 
you,  and  ye  are  disposed  to  go,  eat  ye  whatever  is 
set  before  you,  without  an  inquiry  on  account  of 
conscience.  (28)  But  if  any  one  shall  say  to  you, 
This  pertaineth  to  a  sacrifice ;  eat  not,  for  the  sake 


17 


18 
19 


22 


25 

26 
27 


28 


Sy. 


Sy.  hXm 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


316 


1   CORINTHIANS,   XI. 


9  By. 
Aramaeans. 


^  or,  be  saved. 


«  Sy. 

dSy.]S]]Lc 
*  or,  exdusive 


S3r.)j.O 


of  him  who  told  you,  and  for  conscienoe's  sake. 
(29)  The  conscience  I  speak  o^  is.  not  your  own,  29 
but  his  who  told  you.     But  why  is  my  liberty 

{'udged  o^  by  the  conscience  of  others  ?    (80)  If  I  30 
)y  grace  partake,  why  am  I  reproached  for  that, 
for  which  1  ffive  thanks  ?    (31)  If  therefore  ye  eat,  31 
or  if  ye  drink,  or  if  ye  do  any  thing,  do  all  things 
for  the  glory  of  God.     (32)  Be  ye  without  offence  32 
to  the  Jews,  and  to  tne  Gentiles,  sr  and  to  the 
church  of  God :  (88)  even  as  I  also,  in  every  thing,  88 

E lease  every  man ;  and  do  not  seek  what  is  profita- 
le  to  me,  but  what  is  profitable  to  many;  that 
they  may  live."*     [XI.]  Be  ye  imitators  of  me,  as  XL 
I  am  of  the  Messiah* 

Moreover  I  commend  you,  my  Brethren,  that  in    2 
all  things  ye  are  mindful  of  me,  and  that  ye  hold 
fast  the  precepts  as  I  delivered  them  to  you.    {S)    8 
And  I  would  have  you  know,  that  the  head*  or 
eveiy  man  is  the  Messiah,  and  the  head  of  the 
woman  is  the  man,  and  the  head  of  the  Messiah  is 
God.    (4)  Every  man,  who  prayeth  or  prophesi-    4 
eth^  with  his  head  covered,  oishonoreth  his  nead. 
(5J  And  every  woman,  who  prayeth  or  prophesi-    5 
etn  with  her  head  uncovered,  dishonoreth  her 
head;  for  she  is  on  a  level  with  her  whose  head  is 
shaven.    (6)  For  if  a  woman  be  not  covered,  let    6 
her  also  be  shorn;  but  if  it  be  shameful  for  a 
woman  to  be  shorn  or  shaven,  let  her  be  covered. 
(7)  The  man,  indeed,  ought  not  to  cover  his  head,    7 
because  he  is  the  likeness  and  glory  of  God :  but 
the  woman  is  the  glory  of  the  man.     (8)  For.  the    8 
man  was  not  from  the  woman,  but  the  woman  fix)m 
the  man.    (9)  Neither  was  the  man  created  for  the    9 
woman's  sake,  but  the  woman  for  the  man's  sake. 
(10)  For  this  cause  ought  the  woman  to  have  on  10 
her  head  [the  mark  of]  authority,®  because  of  the 
angels.^     (11)  Nevertheless,  the  man  is  not  with-  11 
out®  the  woman,  nor  the  woman  without  the  man, 
in  our  Lord.    (12)  For  as  the  woman  [was]  fix)m  12 
the  man,  so  the  man  is  by  the  woman ;  and  every 
thing  is  from  God.     (13)  Judge  for  yourselves,  18 
among  yourselves;  is  it  becoming,  that  a  woman 
pray  to  God  with  her  head  uncovered?    (14)  Doth  14 
not  nature^  teach  you,  that  in  a  man,  if  his  hair 
gioweth  long,  it  is  a  reproach  to  him  ?    (15)  But  15 
»>r  a  woman,  if  her  hair  is  abundant^  it  is  a  glory 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,    XL 


317 


to  her;  for  her  hair  is  given  to  her  for  a  covering. 

16  (16)  But  if  any  one  is  c5odtentious  about  these 
things,  we  on  eur  part  have  no  such  custom,  nor 
hath  the  church  of  uod. 

17  This  which  I  now  enjoin,  is  not  as  praising  you ; 
for  ye  have  not  made  progress,  but  have  deteriora- 

18  ted.  (18)  Because,  first ;  when  ye  assemble  in  the 
church,  tnere  are,  I  hear,  divisions  among  you ;  and 

19  I  partly  believe  it.  (19^  For  there  are  to  be  con- 
tentionsar  among  you,  tnat  the  approved  among 

20  you  may  be  known.  (20)  When  therefore  ye 
come  together,  ye  eat  and  drink,  not  as  is  becom- 

21  ing  on  the  day  of  our  Lord.  (21)  But,  one  and 
anotherproceedeth  to  eat  his  own  supper ;  and  one 

22  is  hungry,  and  another  is  drunken.  (22)  What  I 
have  ye  no  houses  in  which  ye  can  eat  and  drink? 
or,  despise  ye  the  church  of  God,  and  shame  them 
who  have  nothing?  What  shall  I  say  to  you? 
Shall  I  praise  you  ?  In  this  I  praise  you  not. 
(23)  For  1  have  received  from  our  Lord,  that  which 
I  imparted  to  you;  that  our  Lord  Jesus,  on  the 

24  night  he  was  betrayed,  took  bread,  (24)  and  blessed, 
and  brake  [it],  and  said:  "Take,  eat;  this  is  my 
body,  which  is  broken  for  your  sakes :  thus  do  ye, 
in  remembrance  of  me."  (25)  So,  after  they  had 
supped,  he  gave  also  the  cup,  and  said :  "  This  cup 
is  the  new  testament^  in  my  blood :  thus  do  ye,  as 
often  as  ye  drink  [it],  in  remembrance  of  me" 
(26)  For  as  often  as  ye  eat  this  bread,  and  drink 
this  cup,  ye  commemorate  the  death  of  our  Lord, 
until  his  advent  (27)  He  therefore,  who  eateth 
of  the  bread  of  the  Lord,  and  drinketh  of  his  cup, 
and  is  not  worthy  of  it,  is  guilty  of  the  blood  of  the 
Lord,  and  of  his  bodv.  (28)  For  this  reason,  a 
man  should  examine  nimself,  and  then  eat  of  tnis 
bread,  and  drink  of  this  cup :  (29)  for,  whoever 
eateth  and  drinketh  of  it,  wnile  he  is  unworthy, 
eateth  and  drinketh  condemnation  on  himself,  by 

30  not  discerning  the  body  of  the  Lord.  (30)  For  this 
cause,  many  among  you  are  diseased  and  sickly, 
and  many  sleep.'  (31)  For  if  we  would  judge 
ourselves,  we  should  not  be  judged.  (32)  But 
when  we  are  judged  by  our  Lord,  we  are  reallv 
chastised,^  that  we  may  not  be  condemned  witn 
the  world.    (33)  Wherefore,  my  Brethren,  when  ye 

34  assemble  to  eat,  wait  ye  one  for  another.    (34)  And 


23 


25 


26 
27 


29 


81 
82 


33 


Sy.U-i> 


6r.  Sictd^x'n 


OT^  have  died. 


^  Sj.  art  cha»' 
Used  to  be 
ehastiMtd, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


318 


1  CORINTHIANS,   XII. 


bay   ]^l\> 

c  or,  voice. 


dSy.iOija 

«Sy. 
IAogtiglLo 

*Sy. 

«  or,  speech. 
hSy.)lLa 


^Sy. 


let  him  who  is  hungry,  eat  at  home ;  that  ye  may 
assemble,  not  for  condemnation.  And  as  tp  other 
things,  1  will  give  you  directions  When  I  come. 

And    concerning   spirituals, »  my  brethren,  XII. 
I  would  have  you  know,  (2)  that  ye  have  been    2 
pagans  ;^  and  have  been,  without  distinction,  led 
away  after  idols,  in  which  there  is  no  speech.* 

(3)  1  therefore  inform  you,  that  there  is  no  man,     3 
that  speaketh  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  who  saith  that 
Jesus  is  accursed  :<i  neither  can  a  man  say  that 
Jesus  is   the  Lord,  except  by  the  Holy  Spirit. 

(4)  Now  there  are  diversities  of  gifts;®   but  the    4 
Spirit  is  one.    (5)  And  there  are  diversities  of  min-    5 
istrations;   but  the  Lord  is  one.    (6)   And  there    6 
are  diversities  of  energies  ;f  but  Gk)d,  who  worketh 
all  in  all  men,  is  one.    (7)  And  to  each  man,  there    7 
is  given  a  manifestation  of  the  Spirit,  that  it  may 
aid  him.    (8)  To  one,  by  the  Spirit,  there  is  given    8 
a  wordar  of  wisdom ;  and  to  another,  by  the  same 
Spirit,  there  is  given  a  word  of  knowledge :  (9)  to    9 
another,  by  the  same  Spirit,  faith :  to  another,  by 
the  same  Spirit,  gifts  of  healing:    (10)   and  to  10 
another,    miracles :*>   and   to  another,  prophecy: 
and  to  another,  the  discerning  of  spirits :  and  to 
another,  [divers]  kinds  of  tongues :  and  to  another, 
the  interpretation  of  tongues.     (11)  But  all  these,  11 
worketh  that  one  Spirit;   and  he  distributeth  to 
every  one  as  he  pleaseth.    (12)  For  as  the  body  is  12 
one,  and  in  it  are  many  members ;  and  all  those 
members  of  the  body,  though  many,  are  one  body; 

so  also  is  the  Messiah.    (13)  For  all  of  us,  likewise,  13 
by  one  Spirit,  have  been  baptized  into  one  body, 
whether  Jews  or  Gentiles,*  whether  slaves  or  free; 
and  all  of  us  have  drinked  in  one  Spirit.     (14)  For  14 
a  body  also,  is  not  one  member,  but  many.   (15)  For  15 
if  the  foot  should  say,  Because  I  am  not  the  hand, 
I  am  not  of  the  body ;  is  it,  on  that  account,  not 
of  the  body  ?    (16)  Or  if  the  ear  should  say.  Be-  16 
cause  I  am  not  the  eye,  I  am  not  of  .the  boay;  is 
it,  on  that  account,  not  of  the  body  ?    {IT)  And  if  17 
the  whole  body  were  an  eye,  where  would  be  the 
hearing  ?     Or  if  it  were  all  hearing,  where  would 
be  the  smelling  ?    (18)  But  now  hath  God  placed  18 
every  one  of  the  members  in  the  body,  according 
to  his  pleasure.    (19)  And  if  they  were  aD  one  19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   CORINTHIANS,    XIII. 


319 


20  mamber,  where  would  be  the  body?  (20)  But 
now  they  are  many  members,  vet  but  one  body. 

21  (21)  The  eye  cannot  say  to  the  hand,  Thou  art  not 
needful  to  me :  nor  can  the  head  say  to  the  feet,  Ye 

22  are  not  needftd  to  me.  (22)  But  rather,  those 
members  which  are  accounted  feeble,  are  indispen- 

28  sable.  (28)  And  those  which  we  think  dishonora- 
ble in  tne  body,  on  them  we  heap  more  honor ; 
and  those  that  are  uncomely,  on  them  we  put  the 

24  more  decoration.  (24)  For  the  honorable  members 
in  us,  have  no  need  of  honor :  for  God  hath  tem- 
pered the  body,  and  given  more  honor  to  the  mem- 

25  oer  which  is  mferior :  (25)  that  there  might  be  no 
disunion^  in  the  boay,  but  that  all  the  members, 

26  equally,  might  care  for  one  another;  (26)  so  that, 
wnen  one  member  is  in  pain,  they  will  all  sympa- 
thize ;  and  if  one  member  is  exalted,  all  the  mem- 

27  bers  will  be  exalted.    (27)  Now  ye  are  the  body 

28  of  Messiah,  and  members  in  your  place.  (28)  For 
God  hath  placed  in  his  church,  first,  legates;  after 
them,  prophets;  after  them,  teachers ;  after  them, 
workers  of  miracles ;  after  them,  the  gifts  of  heal- 
ing, and  helpers,  and  leaders,  and  [various]  kinds 

29  of  tongues.  (29)  Are  they  all  legates?  Are  they 
all  prophets?    Are  thev  all  teacners?     Are  they 

80  all  workers  of  miracles?  (30)  Have  all  of  them 
the  gifts  of  healing?    Do  they  all  speak  with 

81  tongues  ?  Or  do  thev  all  interpret  ?— (31)  And  if 
ve  are  emulous  of  the  superior  gifts,  on  the  other 
hand,  I  show  to  you  a  better  way. 

Xm.  If  I  could  speak  in  every  tongue  of  men,  and 
in  that  of  angels,  and  there  shoula  be  no  love*  in 
me,  I  should  be  like  brass  that  resoundeth,  or  the 

2  cymbal  that  maketh  a  noise.  (2)  And  if  there 
should  be  in  me  [the  gift  of]  prophecy,  and  I  should 
understand  all  the  mysteries,  and  every  science; 
and  if  there  should  be  in  me  all  faith,  so  that  I 
could  move  mountains,  and  love  should  not  be  in 

8  me,  I  should  be  nothing.  (3)  And  if  I  should  feed 
out  to  the  destitute  all  I  possess ;  and  if  I  should 

g've  my  body  to  be  burned ;  and  there  should  be  no 
ve  in  me,  1  gain  nothing. — (4)  Love  is  long-suf- 
fering, and  is  kind ;  love  is  not  envious ;  love  is  not 
5  boisterous ;  and  is  not  inflated ;  (5)  and  doth  noth- 
ing that  causeth  shame ;  and  seeketh  not  her  own ; 


•»  or  division. 


Sy.]fiaM 


Digitized  by 


Google 


320 


1  CORINTHIANS,   XIV. 


>»  Sy.  a  littU  cf 
much. 


•   Sy.  a  littU  of 
much. 


6 


is  not  passionate ;  and  thinketh  no  evil ;  (6)  le- 
joiceth  not  in  iniquity,  but  rejoiceth  in  the  truth ; 
(7^  beareth  all  things,  believeth  all  things,  hopeth    7 
m^  and  endnreth  all.    (8)  Love  will  never  cease.    8 
But  prophesyings  will  end;  and  tongues  will  be 
silent;  and  knowledge  will  vanish.     (9)  For  we    9 
know  but  partially;^  and  we  prophesy  but  partially. 
(10J  But  when  completeness  shall  come,  then  that  10 
which  is  partial  will  vanish  away.    (11)  When  I  11 
was  a  child,  I  talked  as  a  child,  and  I  reasoned  as  a 
child,  and  I  thought  as  a  child :  but  when  I  became 
a  man,   I  laid   aside    the  things    of  childhood. 
(12)  And  now  we  see,  as  by  a  mirror,  in  simili-  12 
tttde;  but  then  face  to  face:  now  I  know  partially ;« 
but  then  shall   I  know,  just  as  I  am  known. 
(18)  For  these  three  things  are  abiding,  faith,  and  13 
hope,  and  love ;  but  the  greatest  of  these  is  love. 


2 


8 


« 


Follow  after  love ;  and  be  emulous  of  the  gifts  XTV. 
of  the  Spirit,  and  especially,  that  ye  may  prophesy. 
(2)  For  ne  that  speaketh  in  a  tongue,  speaketh  not 
unto  men,  but  unto  God ;  for  no  one  understandeth 
what  is  said ;  yet  in  the  spirit,  he  speaketh  a  mys- 
tery. (8)  But  he  that  prophesieth,  speaketh  unto 
men,  for  edification,  and  exhortation,  and  consola- 
tion. (4)  He  that  speaketh  in  a  tongue,  edifieth 
himself:  and  he  that  prophesieth,  edifieth  the 
church.  (5)  Now  I  would  that  ye  all  spoke  with 
tongues,  but  rather  that  ye  prophesied ;  for  greater 
is  he  that  prophesieth,  than  he  that  s|)eaketh  in  a 
tongue,  unless  he  interpret ;  and  if  he  interpret,  he 
edineth  the  church.  (6)  And  now,  my  brethren,  if 
I  should  come  among  you,  and  speak  to  you  in 
tongues,  what  should  I  profit  you ;  unless  I  should 
speak  to  you  either  by  revelation,  or  by  knowledge, 
or  by  prophecy,  or  by  doctrine?  (7)  For  even  in- 
animate tilings  that  emit  sound,  whether  pipe  or 
harp,  if  they  make  no  distinction  between  one  sound 
and  another,  how  will  it  be  known,  what  is  sung  or 
what  is  harped  ?  (8)  And  if  the  trumpet  shall  give 
an  uncertain  sound,  who  will  prepare  himseli  for 
the  battle  ?  (9)  So  likewise  if  ye  utter  a  discourse 
in  a  tongue,  and  there  is  no  interpretation  give"n, 
how  will  it  be  known  what  ye  have  said  ?  Ye  will 
have  been  as  if  ye  spoke  into  the  air.  (10)  For  lo, 
there  are  many  kinds  of  tongues  in  the  world;  and 


8 


10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   CORINTHIANS,   XIV. 


SUl 


11 


L8 


there  is  not  one  of  them  without  meaning.* 
(llj  But  if  I  do  not  know  the  import^  of  the  sound, 
I  snail  be  a  barbarian<:  to  him  that  speaketh,  and 
the  speaker  will  be  a  barbarian  to  me.  (12J  So 
also  ye,  since  ye  are  emulous  of  the  gifts  or  the 
Spirit  for  the  edification  of  the  church,  seek  ye  to 
exceL    (18)  And  let  him  that  speaketh  in  a  tongue, 

L4  pray  that  he  may  interpret.  (14)  For  if  I  should 
pray  in  a  tongue,  my  spirit  prayeth,  but  my  under- 

15  standing  is  without  frmts.  (15)  What  then  shall  I 
do?  I  will  pray  with  my  spirit^  and  will  pray 
with  my  understanding;  and  1  will  sing  with  my 
spirit,   and    will    sing    with    my  understanding. 

16^  (16)  Otherwise,  if  thou  blessest  m  the  spirit,  how 

*  shall  he  that  filleth  the  place  of  one  unlearned,  <J  say 

Amen,  on  thy  giving  thanks ;  for  he  knoweth  not 

17  what  thou  sayest?     (17)  Thou  blessest,  indeed, 

18  very  well ;  but  thy  neighbor  is  not  edified.  (18)  I 
tlumk  God,  that  I  spjeak  with  tongues  more  than  all 

19  of  you.  (19)  But  in. the  church,  I  would  rather 
speak  five  words  with  my  understanding,  that  I 
might  instruct  others,  than  a  myriad  of  words  in 

20  tongue. — (20)  My  brethren,  be  ye  not  children  m 
your  thoughts ;  but  to  evil  things  be  ye  infants ; 
and  in  your  thoughts  be  men.®  (21)  In  the  law  it 
is  written,  With  a  foreign  speech,  and  in  another 
tongue,  will  I  speak  with  this  people ;  and  even  so 
also  they  will  not  hearken  to  me,  saith  the  Lord. 

22  (22)  Wherefore,  tonmies  are  estftblished,  for  a  sign, 
not  to  the  believers,  out  to  them  that  believe  not. 
But  prophesyings  are  not  for  those  who  believe  not, 

28  but  for  them  that  believe.  (23)  If  therefore  the 
whole  church^  assemble,  and  they  all  speak  with 
tongues,  and  there  come  in  unlearned  persons,  or 
such  as  believe  not,  will  they  not  say :  These  peo- 

84  pie  are  crazy  ?  (24)  But  if  ye  should  be  all  pro- 
phesying, and  one  unlearned  or  an  unbeliever 
should  come  among  you,  he  is  explored  by  you  all, 

26  and  rebuked  by  you  all ;  (25)  and  the  secrets  of  his 
heart  are  laid  open  [to  him] :  and  so  he  will  fall 
upon  his  face,  and  will  worship  God,  and  say 
Verily,  God  is  in  you. — (26)  I  therefore  say  [to 
you]  my  brethren,  that  when  ye  assemble,  whoever 
of  you  hath  a  psalm,  let  him  speak ;  and  whoever 
hath  a  doctrine,  and  whoever  hath  a  revelation,  and 
whoever  hath  a  tongue,  and  whoever  hath  an 


Sy.  a  voice. 
Sy.  ai\i  »i 
•  Sy.  UiiSl^ 


21 


26 


Sy. 

Gr.  Miwrat. 


«  Sy./iUl,  com- 
plete. 


Sy.l^i 


Digitized  by 


Google 


322 


1  CORINTHIANS,   XV. 


•Sy. 

t>  OTt  orv  saved. 


interpretatioiu     Let  them  all  be  for  edification. 
(27)  And  if  any  speak  in  a  tongue,  let  two  speak,  27 
or  at  most,  three;  and  let  them  speak  one  by  one; 
and  let  [some]  one  inteq)ret.    (28J  And  if  there  is  28 
none  to  interpret,  let  him  that  speaketh  in  a  tongae, 
be  silent  in  tne  church ;  and  let  him  speak  to  him- 
self and  to  God.    (29)  And  as  to  propnets,  let  two  29 
or  three  speak,  and  let  the  rest  judge.     (80)  And  SO 
if  to  another  sitting  by,  there  snould  be  a  revela- 
tion, let  the  first  stop  speaking.    (31)  For  ye  can  81 
all  prophesy,  one  by  one ;  so  3iat  eveir  one  may 
learn,  and  every  one  be  comforted.    (82)  For  the  82 
roirit  of  the  prophets  is  subject  to  tne  prophets. 
(88)^Bec&use,Goa  is  not  Jthe^authorj  of  tuinuftjb.ut  88 
^  (rf^peace,  as  in  alTcEurclies  ot  the  siints.— ^34)  Let  S4 
"  your  women  be'silent  in  the  church :  "for  it  is  not 
permitted  them  to  speak,  but  to  be  in  subjection,  as 
also  the  law  saith.    (35)  And  if  they  wish  to  be  85 
informed  on  any  subject,  let  them  ask  their  hus- 
K  or,  hnmodtiL  bands  at  home :  for  it  is  unbecomingsr  for  women  to 

speak  in  the  church.    (36)  What  1  was  it  from  you  86 
that  the  word  of  God  came  forth  ?    Or  did  it  reach 
only  to  you?    (37)  And  if  any  one  among  you  87 
thinketh  that  he  is  a  prophet,  or  that  he  is  spiritual, 
let  him  recognize  the  thmgs  which  I  write  to  vou, 
as  bein^  the  precepts  of  our  Lord.    (38)  But  if  any  88 
one  be  ignorant,  let  him  be  ignorant— (39)  Where-  89 
fore,  my  Drethren,  be  emulous  of  prophesying :  and 
to  speaK  with  tongues,  prohibit  not     (40)  Sut  let  40 
every  thing  be  done  with  decency  and  regularity. 


And  I  make  known  to  you,  my  brethren,  the  XV 
gospel*  which  I  preached  to  you,  and  which  ye 
received,  and  in  which  ye  stand,  (2)  and  by  which  2 
ye  have  life.**  In  what  terms  I  preached  to  you, 
ye  remember;  unless  ye  have  oelieved  in  vain. 
(3)  For  I  delivered  to  you  from  the  first,  as  I  had 
received  it ;  that  the  Messiah  died  on  account  of 
our  sins,  as  it  is  written :  (4)  and  that  he  was 
buried  and  arose  on  the  third  day,  as  it  is  written : 
(5)  and  that  he  was  seen  by  Cephas;  and  after 
him,  by  the  twelve:  (6)  and  after  that,  he  was 
seen  by  more  than  five  hundred  brethren  at  once ; 
many  of  whom  survive  at  the  present  time,  and 
some  of  them  sleep.  (7)  And  subse<]^uently  to  this, 
he  was  seen  by  James;  and  aft;er  him,  by  all  the 


8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  CORINTHIANS,   XV. 


323 


8  l^ptes.    (8)  And  last  of  them  all,  he  was  seen  by 

9  me,  as  it  were  by  an  abortion.  (9)  I  am  the  least 
of  the  legates ;  and  am  not  wortny  to  be  cieJled  a 
legate ;   because  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God. 

10  (l(y)  But  by  the  grace  of  Gbd,  I  am  what  I  am: 
ana  his  grace,  that  was  in  me,  was  not  in  vain ;  but 
I  labored  more  than  they  all : — not  I,  but  his  grace 

11  that  was  with  me.  (11)  Whether  I,  therefore,  or 
whether  they,  so  we  preached ;  and  so  ye  believed. 

12  — (12)  And  if  the  Messiah  is  proclaimed,  as  rising 
from  the  dead ;  how  is  it  that  there  are  some  among 
you,  who  say,   There  is  no  reviviscence  erf  the 

18  dead  ?«  (13)  And  if  there  is  no  reviviscence  of  the 
14  dead,  the  Messiah  also  hath  not  risen.    (14)  And 

if  the  Messiah  hath  not  risen,  our  preaching  is  vain, 
16  and  your  faith  also  vain.    (15)  And  we  too  are 

founa  fidse  witnesses  of  God ;  for  we  have  testified 
.  concerning  Gt}d,  that  he  raised  up  the  Messiah, 

16  when  he  did  not  raise  him  up.  (16)  For,  if  the 
dead  will  not  arise,  the  Messiah  also  hath  not  risen. 

17  (17)  And  if  the  Messiah  rose  not,  your  faith  is 

18  inane  ;^  and  ye  are  yet  in  vour  sins :  (18)  and  also, 
doubtless,  they  who  have  fallen  asleep  in  the  Mes- 

19  siah,  have  perished.  (19^  And  i^  in  this  life  only, 
we  have  hope  in  the  Messiah,  we  are  the  most 

20  miserable  of  all  men. — (20)  But  now  the  Messiah 
hath  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits 

21  of  them  that  slept.  (21)  And  as  by  a  man  came 
death,  so  also  by  a  man  came  the  reviviscence  of 

22  the  dead.  (22)  For  as  it  was  by  Adam,  that  all  men 
28  die,  so  also  by  the  Messiah  they  all  live :  (28)  every 

one  in  his  order;  the  Messiah  was  the  first-fruits ; 
afterwards,  they  that   are  the  Messiah's,   at  his 

24  coming.  (24)  And  then  will  be  the  end,  when  he 
shall  have  delivered  up  the  kingdom  to  God  the 
Father;  when  every  prince,  and  everv  sovereign, 

25  and  all  powers  shall  have  come  to  naught  (25)  For 
he  is  to  reign,  until  he  shall  put  all  his  enemies 

26  under  his  feet.    (26)  And  the  last  enemy,  death, 

27  will  be  abolished.  (27)  For  he  hath  subjected  alj 
under  his  feet.  But  when  he  said,  that  every  thing 
is  subjected  to  him,  it  is  manifest  that  he  is  ex- 

28  cepted,  who  subjected  all  to  him.  (28)  And  when 
all  shall  be  subjected  to  him,  then  the  Son  himself 
will  be  subject  to  him  who  subjected  all  to  him,  so 

29  that  God  will  be  all  in  all.— <29)  Otherwise,  what 


Sy.^l^O 


Digitized  by 


Google 


324 


1  CORINTHIANS,  XY. 


»8y.«a!^ 


'  Sj.  the  body 
of  its  nature. 


«  Sy. 


&j. 


shall  thej  do  who  are  baptized  for«  the  dead,  if  the 
dead  rise  not?     Why  are,  they  baptized  for  the 
dead?     (80)  And  why  also  do  we  stand  every  80 
hour  in  peril?     (31)  I  protest,  my  brethren,  by  81 
your  exultation,  which  is  mine  in  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  that  I  die  daily.    (32)  I^  as  amongst  82 
men,  I  was  cast  to  wild  beasts  at  EpBesus,  wnat 
did  it  profit  me,  if  the  dead  rise  not?     '^  Let  us  eat 
and  drink;  for  to-morrow  we  die."    (33)  Be  not  88 
deceived;     "Evil    stories    corrupt  well-disposed 
minds."    ^34)  Let  your  hearts  be  righteously  exci-  84 
ted,  and  sm  not:  for  there  are  some,  in  whom  is 
not  the  love  of  God :  it  is  to  your  shame,  I  say  it 

But  some  one  of  you  may  say:  How  will  the  86 
dead  arise  ?  and  with  what  Dody  will  they  come 
forth?    (36)  Foolish  man  1    The  seed  which  thou  86 
sowest,  is  not  quickened,  unless  it  die.    (37)  And  87 
that  which  thou  sowest,  thou  sowest  not  the  body 
that  is  to  be,  but  the  naked  kernel  of  wheat  or  bar- 
ley, or  of  the  other  grains :  (38)  and  Gbd  giveth  it  88 


39 


a  body,  as  he  pleaseth ;  and  to  each  of  the  grains 
its  natural  body.*     (39)  And   every  body  is  not 
alike  ;  for  the  body  of  a  man  is  one  thing,  and  that 
of  a  beast  is  another,  and  that  of  a  bird  is  another, 
and  that  of  a  fish  is  another.     (40)  And  there  are  40 
bodies   celestial,  and  bodies  terrestrial;    but  the 
glory  of  the  celestial  [bodies]  is  one,  and  that  of 
the  terrestrial  is  another.     (41)  And  the  glory  of  41 
the  sun  is  one  thing,  and  the  glory  of  the  moon  is 
another,  and  the  glory  of  the  stars  is  another  ;  and 
one  star  exceedeth  another  star  in  gloiy.     (42)  So  42 
also  in  the  reviviscence  of  the   dead.     They  are 
sown  in  corruption,  they  arise  without  corruption : 

(43)  they  are  sown  in  dishonor,  they  arise  in  glory :  43 
they  are  sown  in  weakness,  they  arise  in  power* 

(44)  it  is  sown  an  animal  body,  it  ariseth  a  spirit-  44 
ual  body.     For  there  is  a  body  of  the  animal  life,« 
and  there  is  a  body  of  the  spirit.     (45)  So,  also  is  it  45 
written :    "  Adam,  the  first  man,  became  a  living 
soul  ;"**  the  second  Adam  [became]   a  quickening 
spirit.     (46)  And  the  spiritual  was  not  first ;  but  46 
the  animal,  and  then  the  spiritual.     (47)  The  first  47 
man  was  of  dust  from  the  earth ;  the  second  man 
was  the  Lord  from  heaven.     (48)  As  he  was  of  the  48 
dust,  so  also  those  who  are  of  the  dust ;  and  as  was 

he  who  was  from  heaven,  so  also  are  the  heavenly. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   CORINTHIANS,   XVI. 


325 


49  (49)  And  as  we  have  worn  the  likeness  of  him 
nbm  the  dust,  so  shall  we  wear  the  likeness  of  him 

50  from  heaven. — (5(y)  But  this  I  say,  my  brethren, 
that  flesh  and  blood  cannot  inherit  the  kingdom  of 
heaven :  neither  doth  corruption  inherit  incorrup- 

51  tion.     (51)  Lo,  I  tell  you  a  mystery ;  we  shall  not 

52  all  sleep,  but  we  shall  all  be  changed,  (52)  sud- 
denly, as  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye,  at  the  last 
trumpet,  when  it  shall  sound ;  and  the  dead  will 
arise,  without  corruption ;  and  we  shall  be  changed, 

58  (63)  For  this  which  is  corruptible,  is  to  put  on  in- 
corruption;  and  that  which  dieth,  will  put  on  im- 

54  mortality.  (54)  And  when  this  that  is  corruptible, 
shall  put  on  incorruption,  and  this  that  dietn,  im- 
mortality ;  then  will  take  place  the  word  that  is 

55  written,  "  Death  is  absorbed  in  victorjr."  (55)  Where 
is  thy  sting,  0  death?     And  where  is  thy  victory, 

56  0  grave  ?»     (56)  Now  the  sting  of  death  is  sin ;  and 

57  the  strength^  of  sin  is  the  law.  (57)  But  thanks 
be  to  QoSj  that  giveth  us  the  victory,  through  our 

58  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (58)  Wherefore,  my 
brethren  and  my  beloved,  be  ye  steadfast,  and  l!e 
not  vacillating ;  but  be  ye  at  all  times  abundant 
in  the  work  of  the  Lord ;  seeing  ye  know,  that  your 
labor  is  not  in  vain  in  the  Lord. 

XVI  And  as  to  the  collection  for  the  saints,  as  I 
directed  the  churches  of  the  Qalatians,  so  do  ye. 
2  (2)  On  each  first  day  of  the  week,  let  every  one  of 
you  lay  aside  and  preserve  at  home,  what  he  is 
able;*  that  there  may  be  no  collections  when  I 
8  come.  (3)  And  when  I  come,  those  whom  ye 
shall  select,  I  will  send  with  a  letter,  to  carry  your 

4  bounty  to  Jerusalem.  (4)  And  if  it  should  be 
suitable  that  I  also  go,  they  shall  go  with  me. 

5  (5)  And  I  will  come  to  you,  when  I  pass  from 
Macedonia ;  for  I  am  about  to  pass  through  Mace- 

6  donia.  (6)  And  perhaps  I  shall  remain  with  you, 
or  winter  with  you ;  that  ye  may  accompany  me 

7  whither  I  go.  (7)  For  I  am  not  disposed  to  see 
you  now,  as  I  pass  along ;  because  I  hope  to  spend 

8  some  time  with  you,  if  my  Lord  permit  me.  (8^  For 

9  I  shall  continue  at  Ephesus  until  Pentecost :  (9)  be- 
cause a  great  door  is  opened  to  me,  which  is  full 
of  occupations  ;^  and  the  opposers  are  numerous. 

10      And  if  Timothy  come  to  you,  sefe  that  he  may 


*  Sy.  ^Oa^ 

"^  Sy.  ]1j 


Sy.  what  Com- 
eth to  his 
hand. 


Sy.  ]3i^OXfi 


Digitized  by 


Google 


326 


1   CORINTHIANS,   XVL 


or,>br. 


be  without  fear  among  jou ;  for  he  doeth  the  work 
of  the  Lord,  as  I  do.    (11)  Therefore,  let  no  one  11 
despise  him ;  but  conduct  him  on  in  peace,  that  he 
may  come  to  me;  for  I  wait  for  nim  with  the 
brethren. — (12)  As  for  Apollos,  mv  brethren,  I  en-  12 
credltHl  iiim  much  to  go  with  the  orethren  to  you ; 
but  his  inclination  was  not  to  go  to  you  now ;  but 
when  he  shall  have  opportunity,  he  will  go  to  you. 
— (18)  Watch  ye,  stand  firm  in  the  £dl£,  act  like  13 
meUi  be  valiant    (14)  Let  all  your  affairs  be  con-  14 
ducted  with  love. 

I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  concerning   the  16 
household  of  Stephanas ;  (for  ye  know,  that  they 
were  the  first-finiits  of  Achaia,  and  that  they  have 
devoted  themselves  to  ministering  to  the  saints ;) 
(16^  that  ye  also  give  ear  to  them  who  are  such ;  16 
ana  to  every  one,  that  laboreth  with  us  and  aideth. 
— (17}  And  I  rejoice  at  the  arrival  of  Stephanas  17 
and  Fortunatus  and  Achaicus :  for  they  have  sup- 
plied that  wherein  ye  were  deficient  towards  me. 
(18)  And^'  they  have  refireshed  my  spirit,   and  18 
yours:  therefore  acknowledge  ye  them  who  are 
such.— (19)  All  the  churches  that  are  in  Asia,  19 
salute  you.    Aquila  and  Priscilla,  with  the  church 
in  their   house,  salute  you  much  in  the  Lord. 
(20)  All  the  brethren  salute  you.    Salute  ye  one  20 
another  with  a  holy  kiss. 

The  salutation  m  the  handwriting  of  myself  21 
Paul  (22)  Whoever  loveth  not  our  Lord  Jesus  22 
the  Messiah,  let  him  be  accursed  :^  our  Lord  com- 
eth.«  (23)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  28 
siah  be  with  you.  (24)  And  my  love  be  with  24 
you  ally  in  the  Messian,  Jesus.    Amen. 


End  cfAeJbrMt  episUe  to  Ae  ChrirUhians;  uhieh  wom  written 
oiPhQipfi  cfMaeiUmiat  and  was  sent  by  Ae  handcf  Tima&fy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Tiie  Second  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  CorintiiiaiiB. 


Paul  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  by  the  good 
pleasure  of  &od;  and  Timothy  a  brother  ;  to  the 
church  of  God  that  is  at  Oorinth,  and  to  all  the 
saints  that  are  in  all  Achaia.    (2)  Grace  be  with 


ithe 


8 


you,  and  peace,  from  God  our  Father,  and  from  qur 
Ix)rd  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  the  Father  of  mercies,  and  the  God  of 

4  all  consolation ;  (4)  who  comforteth  us  in  all  our 
a£3ictions,  that  we  also  might  be  able  to  comfort 
those  who  are  in  all  afflictions,  with  the  consolation 

5  wherewith  we  are  comforted  by  Gtod.  (5)  For,  as 
the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah  abound  in  us,  so  also 

6  our  consolation  aboundeth  by  the  Messiah.  (6)  And 
whether  we  be  afflicted,  it  is  for  your  consolation 
and  for  your  life*  that  we  are  afflicted ;  or  whether 
we  be  comforted,  it  is,  that  ye  may  be  comforted; 
and  that  there  may  be  in  you  an  eagerness,^ 
wherewith  ye  may  endure  those  sufferings  which 

7  we  also  suffer.  (7)  And  our  hope  concerning  you 
is  stead&st :  for  we  know,  that  if  ye  partake  of  the 
sufferings,  ye  will  also  partake  of  the  consolation. 

8  — (8)  But,  my  brethren,  we  wish  you  to  know, 
respecting  the  affliction  that  was  upon  us  in  Asia, 
that  we  were  afflicted  exceedingly,  beyond  oui 
strength,  insomuch  that  our  life  was  ready  to  ter- 

9  minate.  (9J  And  we  passed  a  sentence  of  death 
upon  ourselves,  that  our  confidence  might  not  be 
in  ourselves,  but  in  God,  who  raiseth  up  the  dead ; 

10  (10)  who  rescued  us  from  imminent  death :  and  we 

11  nope  that  he  will  again  rescue  us,  (11 J  by  the  aid 
of  your  prayers  in  our  behalf;  so  that  nis  gift  to  us 
may  be  a  mvor  done  for  the  sake  of  many,  and 
many  may  praise  him  on  our  account. 

L2      For  our  rejoicing  is  this,  the  testimony  of  our 


*  or,  tcUvcUioH, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


828 


a  CORINTHIANS,  IL 


d  Of.  body. 


^By.isfaUhfuL 


pa!Dai3  = 


conscience,  ^^  that  in  simplicity  and  purity,  and  by 
the  grace  of  God,  and  not  in  the  wisdom  of  the 
flesh, <i  we  have  conducted  ourselves  in  the  world, 
and  especially  towards  you.  (13)  We  write  no  18" 
other  things  unto  you,  than  those  which  ye  know 
and  acknowledge.  And  I  trust,  ye  will  acknowl- 
edge them  to  the  end :  (14)  as  ye  have  also  par-  14 
tiaSy  acknowledged  that  we  are  your  rejoicing,  as 

Je  also  are  ours,  in  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
[essiah.  (15)  And  in  this  confidence,  I  was  be-  15 
fore  disposed  to  come  to  you,  that  ye  might  receive 
the  grace  doubly;  (16)  and  to  pass  by  you  into  16 
Macedonia,  and  again  to  come  to  you  from  Mace- 
donia, and  [so]  ye  would  accompany  me  to  Judaea. 
(17)  When  therefore  I  thus  purposed,  did  I  pur-  17 

rse  as  one  inconsiderate  ?    Or,  were  the  thmgs 
purposed,  things  of  the  flesh;®   so  that  there 
should  be  in  them  Yes,  yes,  and  No,  no  ?  (18)  God  18 
is  the  witness,^  that  our  word  to  you  was  not  Yes 
and  No.    (19)  For  the  Son  of  God,  Jesus  the  19 
Messiah,  who  was  preached  to  you  by  us,  [namely,] 
by  me,  by  Sylvanus,  and  by  TKmotheus, — ^was  not 
Yes  and  No ;  but  it  was  Yes  in  him.    (20)  For  all  20 
the  promises  of  Qtod  in  him,  the  Messiah,  are  Yes ; 
for  which  cause,  we  through  him  give  [our]  Amen, 
to  the  glory  of  God.    (21)  Now  it  is  God  who  21 
establisheth  us,  with  you,  in  the  Messiah,  and  hath 
anointed  us,  (22)  and  hath  sealed  us,  and  hath  22 
given  the  earnest?  of  his  Spirit  in  our  hearts. 

Moreover,  I  call  God  for  a  witness  on  my  soul,  23 
that  it  was  in  order  to  spare  you,  that  I  came  not 
to  Corinth.    (24)  Not  that  we  are  lords  over  your  24 
fidth,  but  we  are  helpers  of  your  joy ;  for  it  is  by 
faith  ye  stand.    (11.)  And  I  determined  this  with  IL 
myselJ^  that  I  would  not  again  come  to  you  in  sad- 
ness.   (2)  For  if  I  should  make  you  sad,  who    2 
would  make  me  joyful,  unless  he  whom  I  had 
made  sad  ?    (8)  And  I  wrote  that  very  thing  to    8 
you,  lest  when  I  came,  those  persons  whom  I. ought 
to  make  joyful,  should  make  me  sad.    For  I  have 
confidence  concerning  you,  that  my  joy  is  the  joy 
of  you  all.    (4)  And  in  much  affliction,  and  in    4 
anguish  of  heart,  I  wrote  those  things  to  you,  with 
many  tears ;  not  that  ye  might  have  sorrow,  but 
that  ye  might  know  the  exceeding  love  I  have  for 
you. — (5)  And  if  one  hath  causra  grie^  he  hath    6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


a  CORINTHIANS,   IIL 


829 


not  grieved  me  [only],  but, — ^that  the  declaration 
may  not  bear  too  hard  on  you — ^in  a  measure,  all 

6  of  you.    (6)  And  suflBcient  for  him,  is  this  rebuke 

7  proceeding  from  many :  (7)  so  that,  on  the  other 
nand,  ye  ought  to  forgive  him  and  console  him  ; 
lest  he  who  is  such  a  man,  should  be  swallowed  up 

8  with  excessive  grief.    (8)  I  therefore  beseech  you, 

9  that  ye  confirm  to  him  your  love.  (9)  For  it  was 
for  this  also  that  I  wrote  [to  you],  that  I  might 
learn  by  a  trial,  whether  ye  would  be  obedient  in 

10  every  thing.  (10)  And  whom  ye  forgive,  I  also 
[forgive]  :  for  that  which  I  forgave  to  any  one,  for 
your  sakes  I  forgave  it,  in  the  presence*  of  the 

11  Messiah ;  (11)  lest  Satan  should  overreach  us ;  for 
we  know  his  devices. 

12  Moreover,  when  I  came  to  Troas  in  announcing 
the  Messiah,  and  a  door  was  opened  to  me  by  the 

18  Lord,  (13)  there  was  no  quietude  in  my  spirit,  be- 
cause I  found  not  Titus  my  brother :  and  I  took 

14  leave  of  them,  and  went  into  Macedonia. — (14)  But 
thanks  be  to  God,  who  always  procureth  us  a  tri- 
umph in  the  Messiah,  and  manifesteth  by  us  the 
odor  of  the  knowledge  of  him  in  every  place. 

15  (16)  For,  through  the  Messiah,  we  are  unto  God  a 
sweet  odor,  in  them  that  live^  and  in  them  that 

16  perish :  (16)  to  these,  an  odor  of  death  unto  death ; 
and  to  those,  an  odor  of  life  unto  life.     And  who 

17  is  adequate  to  these  things  1  (17)  For  we  are  not 
like  others, <^  who  dilute  me  words  of  God ;  but  as 
of  the  truth,  and  as  of  God,  we  speak  in  the  Mes- 

m.  siah  before  God. — (III.)  Do  we  begin  again  to 
show  you  who  we  are  ?  Or  do  we,  like  others, 
need  that  letters  recommendatory  of  us  should  be 
written  to  you  ?     Or,  that  ye  should  write  recom- 

2  mendations  of  us  ?  (2)  Ye  are  our  epistle,  written 
on  our  hearts,  and  known  and  read  by  every  man 

8  (8)  For  ye  know  that  ye  are  an  epistle  of  the  Mes- 
siah, ministered  by  us ;  not  written  with  ink,  but 
by  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God ;  not  on  tables  of 
stone,  but  on  the  tablets  of  the  heart  of  flesh. — 

4  (4)  And  such  confidence  have  we  in  the  Messiah 

5  towards  God.  (5)  Not  that  we  are  sufficient  to 
think  any  thing,  as  of  ourselves ;  but  our  efficiency* 

6  is  from  God :  (6)  who  hath  fitted  us  to  be  ministers 
of  the  new  Testament,^  not  in  the  letter,  but  in  the 
Spirit ;  for  the  letter  killeth,  but  the  Spirit  giveth 


or,  are  naved. 


By.OertsL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


880 


2   CORINTHIANS,   IV. 


^  or,  Mverft. 


dSv.lZoflujl 


•  Sy.  \o^y 


'8y. 


lOaX 


V°^ 


life.®    (7)  Now  if  the  ministaration  of  death  was  en-    7 
graved  upon  stones  in  writing,  and  was  so  glorious 
that  the  children  of  Israel  could  not  look  on  the 
face  of  Moses,  on  account  of  the  glory  upon  his 
face  which  vanished  awajr ;  (8)  how  then  snail  not    8 
the  ministration  of  the  Spirit  be  still  more  gl^ious  ? 
(9)  For  if  there  was  glory  in  the  ministration  of     9 
condemnation,  how  much  more  shall  the  ministra- 
tion of  justification**  excel  in  glory  ?    (10)  For  that  10 
which  was  glorious,  was  as  if  not  glorious,  in  com- 
parison with  this  which  excelleth  in  glory.  (11)  For  11 
if  that  which  is  abolished  was  glorious,  much  more 
must  that  which  abideth  be  glorious. — (12)  Seeing  12 
therefore  we  have  this  hope,  we  the  more  speak 
with  boldness;  (18)  and  are  not  like  Moses,  who  18 
threw  a  vail  over  his  face,  that  the  children  of  Israel 
might  not  behold  the  termination  of  that  which  was 
abolished.    (14|)  But  the]^  were  blinded  in  their  un-  14 
derstanding ;  for  until  this  day,  when  the  old  Tes- 
tament® is  read,  the  same  vail  resteth  upon  them^ 
nor  is  it  manifest  [to  them],  that  it  is  abolished  by 
the  Messiah.    (16)  And  unto  this  day,  when  Mo-  15 
ses  is  read,  a  vail  is  thrown  upon  their  hearts. 
(16)  But  when  any  of  them  is  turned  unto  the  16 
Lord,  the  vail  is  taken  from  him.     (17)  Now  the  17 
Lord  himself  is  the  Spirit     And  where  the  Spirit 
of  the  Lord  is,  there  is  freedom.    (18)  And  we  all,  18 
with  uncovered  faces,  behold  as  in  a  mirror  the 
glory  of  the  Lord ;  and  are  transformed  into  the 
same  likeness,  from  glory  to  glory,  as  by  the  Lord 
the  Spirit. 


Therefore,  we  are  not  weary  in  this  ministry  IV 
which  we  have  received,  according  to  the  mercies 
that  have  been  upon  us :  (2)  But  we  have  renounced 
the  concealments  of  dishonor,  and  we  walk  not  in 
craftiness,  nor  do  we  treat  the  word  of  God  deceit- 
fully ;  but  by  the  manifestation  of  the  truth,  we  ex- 
hibit ourselves  to  all  the  consciences  of  men  before 
Gbd. — (8)  And  if  our  gospel*  is  vailed,  it  is  vailed 
to  them  that  perish ;  (1)  to  them  whose  minds  the 
God  of  this  world  hath  blinded,  in  order  that  they 
might  not  believe,  lest  the  light  of  the  gospel  of  the 
glory  of  the  Messiah  (who  is  the  likeness  of  Gbd) 
shomd  dawn  upon  them.  (5)  For  it  is  not  ourselves 
that  we  preach,  but  the  Messiah,  Jesus  our  Lord ; 


2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


a  CORINTHIANS,    V. 


331 


and,  as  to  ourselves,  that  we  are  jour  servants  for 

6  Jesus'  sake.  (6)  Because  God,  who  commanded  the 
light  to  arise  from  darkness,  hath  himself  shined  in 
our  hearts,  that  we  might  be  illuminated  with  the 
knowledge  of  the  glory  of  God  on  the  face  of  Jesus 

7  the  Messiah. — (7J  But  we  have  this  treasure  in  an 
earthen  vessel,  tnat  the  excellency  of  the  power** 

8  might  be  from  God,  and  not  from  us.  (8)  And  in 
every  thing  we  are  oppressed,  but  not  suffocated ; 

9  we  are  corrected,  but  not  condemned ;  (9)  we  are 
persecuted,  but  not  forsaken ;  we  are  prostrated,  but 

10  perish  not  (10)  For  we  bear  in  our  body,  at  all 
times,  the  dying  of  Jesus ;  that  the  life  also  of  Jesus 

11  might  be  manifested  in  our  body.  (11)  For  if  we 
are  delivered  over  alive  unto  death,  for  Jesus'  sake, 
even  so  also  will  the  life  of  Jesus  be  manifested  in 

12  this  our  mortal  body.— (12]  Now  therefore,  in  us 
18  death  is  active,  but  in  you,  lite.     (18)  Having  there- 
fore the  same  spirit  of  faith, — (as  it  is  written,  I 
believed,  therefore  also  have  I  spoken,)  we  also 

14  believe,  and  therefore  speak ;.  (14)  knowing  that  he, 
who  resuscitated  our  Lord  Jesus,  will  also  resusci- 
tate us  by  Jesus,  and  will  receive  us,  with  you,  to 

15  himself.  (15)  For  all  things  are  for  your  sakes,  that 
while  grace  aboundeth  by  means  of  many,  thanks- 
giving may  abound  to  the  glory  of  God. 

16  For  this  cause  we  faint  not ;  for  though  our  out- 
ward man  perish,  yet  the  inner  [man]  is  renovated 

17  day  by  day.  (17)  For  the  affliction  of  the  present 
time,  though  very  small  and  light,  prepareth  for  us 
great    glory,    without  end,   for  ever    and   ever; 

18  (18)  while  we  look  not  at  these  seen  things,  but  at 
those  not  seen;  for  these  seen  things  are  tempo- 

V.  rary,  but  those  not  seen  are  eternal.  (V.)  For  we 
know  that,  if  our  house  on  earth — ^this  of  the  body, 
were  dissolved,  yet  we  have  a  building  of  God,  a 
house  not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  heaven. 

2  (2)  And  on  this  account  also,  we  groan,  and  wish 

3  to  be  clothed  with  our  house  from  heaven :  (3)  if 
indeed,  when  clothed,  we  shall  not  be  found  naked. 

4  (4)  For  while  we  are  here  in  this  house,  we  groan 
under  its  burden ;  yet  ye  desire,  not  to  throw  it 
off,  but  to  be  clothed  over  it,  so  that  its  mortality 

6  may  be  absorbed  in  life.    (5)  And  he  that  pre- 
pareth us  for  this  thing,  is  God ;  who  hath  given 
6  us  the  earnest*  of  his  Spirit.     (6)  Therefore,  because 


Sy.U 


or,  jMge, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


332 


a  CORINTHIANS,  VI. 


Gr.  /3^|Mx. 


12,ja  ooi 


«Sy.lAA4>^ 
'^Sy.|/onol 

*  or,  salvtUion, 


7 
8 

9 

10 


11 


13 

14 


we  know  and  are  perdnaded,  that  while  we  lodge  in 
the  body  we  sojourn  away  from  our  Lord ;  (7)  (for 
we  walk  by  faith,  and  not  by  sight ;)  (8)  therefore 
we  are  conMent,  and  desirous  to  be  away  from  the 
body,  and  to  be  with  our  Lord.  (9)  We  are  assid- 
uous, that  whether  we  are  absent,  or  whether  at 
home,  we  may  please  him.  (10)  For  we  are  all  to 
stand  before  the  judgment-seat**  of  the  Messiah,  that 
each  may  receive  retribution  in  the  body,  [for]  what 
he  hath  done  in  it,  whether  of  good,  or  wnether  of 

SYJl. 

Therefore  because  we  know  the  fear  of  our  Lord, 
we  persuade  men ;  and  we  are  made  manifest  unto 
God ;  and  I  hope  also,  ^e  are  made^manifest  to  your 
minds.    (12)  We  do  not  again  laud  ourselves  to  12 
you ;  but  we  give  you  occasion  to  glory  in  us,  to 
them  who  glory  in  appearance  and  not  in  heart. 
(13)  For  if  we  are  extravagant,  it  is  for  God :  and 
if  we  are  discreet,  it  is  for  you.    (14)  For  the  love 
of   the  Messiah  constraineth  us  to  reason  thus: 
One  died  for  all ;  therefore  are  all  dead.    (15)  And  15 
he  died  for  all,  that  they  who  live  should  not  live 
tb  themselves,  but  to  him  who  died  for  them  and 
rose  again.    (16)  And  therefore,  we  know  no  person  16 
after  the  flesh :  and  if  we  have  known  the  Messiah 
after  the  flesh,  yet  henceforth  we  know  [him]  no 
more.    (17)  Whoever  therefore  is  in  the  Messiah,  17 
is  a  new  creature  :^  old  things  have  passed  awav ; 

(18)  and  all  things  are  made  new,  by  God;  who  18 
hatn  reconciled  us  to  himself  by  the  Messiah,  and 
hath  given  to  us  Jhe  ministry  of  recgncili^tion*-  ^ 

(19)  For  God  was  in  the  Messiah,  who  Hath  recon-  19 
ciled  the  world  with  his  majesty,  and  did  not  reckon 
to  them  their  sins ;  and  who  hath  placed  in  us  the 
word  of  reconciliation, v-{20)  We  are  therefore 
ambassadors  for  the  Messiah,  and  it  is  as  if  God  was 
beseeching  you  by  us.     In  behalf  of  the  Messiah, 
therefore,  we  beseech  [you],  be  ye  reconciled  to 
God.    (21)  For,  on  your  account,  he  hath  made  him  21 
who  knew  no  sin  to  be  sin,®  that  we  might  by  him 
become  the  righteousness^  of  God. — (VI.)    And  VL 
as  aiders  we  entreat  of  you,  that  the  grace  of  God 
which  ve  have  received,  may  not  be  ineffectual  in 
you.    (2)  For  he  hath  said,  In  an  acceptable  time    2 
have  I  heard  thee,  and  in  the  day  of  life*  I  have 
aided  thee.    Behold,  now  is  the  acceptable  time  I 


20 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  CORINTHIANS,    VIL 


333 


3  and  behold,  now  is  the  day  of  life  I  (8)  Give  ye  no 
occasion  of  offence  to  any  one  in  any  thing,  that 

4  there  may  be  no  reproach  on  our  ministry.  (4)  But 
we,  in  all  things,  would  show  ourselves  to  be  the 
ministers  of  God,  in  much  endurance,  in  afflictions, 

5  in  necessity,  in  distresses,  {6\  in  scourgings,  in  impris- 
onments, in  tumults,  in  toil,  in  watching,  in  fasting ; 

6  (6)  by  purity,  by  knowledge,  by  long  suflfering,  by 
benignity,  by  the  Holy  Spirit,  by  love  unfeigned, 

7  (7)  by  the  speaking  of  truth,  by  the  energy  of  God, 
by  the  armor  of  ri^teousness  on  the  right  hand  and 

8  on  the  left;  (8)  amid  honor  and  dishonor,  amid 
praise  and  contumely ;  as  deceiyers,  and  yet  true ; 

9  (9)  as  not  known,  and  yet  we  are  well  known ;  as 
dying,  and  behold,  we  live ;  as  chastised,  yet  not 

10  killed;  (10)  as  sorrowful,  yet  always  rejoicmg;  as 
indigent,  yet  enriching  many ;  as  possessing  noth- 

11  ing,  yet  having  all  things. — (11)  0  ye  Corinthians, 
our  mouth  is  opened  towards  you,  and  our  heart 

12  expanded.    (12)  Ye  are  not  straitened  in  us,  but 
18  ye  are  straitened  in  your  own  bowels.**    (18)  I 

speak  as  to  [my]  children.  Pay  me  the  debt  which 
ye  owe,<^  and  expand  your  love  towards  me. — 

14  (14)  And  be  ye  not  yoke-fellows  with  them  that 
believe  not :  for  what  fellowship  hath  righteousness 
with  iniquity  ?  or  what  communion  hath  light  with 

15  darkness?  (16)  or  what  concord  hath  the  Messiah 
with  Satan  ?  or  what  part  hath  a  believer  with  an 

16  unbeliever?  (16)  or  what  agreement  hath  the  tem- 
ple of  God  with  that  of  demons?  For  ye  are  the 
temple  of  the  living  God ;  as  it  is  said,  I  will  dwell 
among  them,  and  walk  among  them,  and  will  be 

17  their  God,  and  they  shall  be  my  people.  (17)  Where- 
fore, come  ye  out  from  among  them,  and  be  ye 
separate  from  them,  saith  the  Lord ;  and  come  not 
near  the  unclean  thing,  and  I  will  receive  you; 

18  (18)  and  will  be  to  you  a  Father,  and  ye  shall  be 
sons  and  daughters  to  me,  saith  the  Lord  Almighty. 

Vn. — (VIL.)  Seeing,  therefore,  we  have  these  promises, 
my  beloved,  let  us  cleanse  ourselves  from  all  defile- 
ment of  the  flesh  and  of  the  spirit ;  and  let  us  work 
righteousness,  in  the  fear  of  God. 

2  Bear  with  us,  my  brethren ;  we  have  done  evil 
to  no  one;  we  have  corrupted  no  one;  we  have 

3  wronged  no  one.  (8)  I  speak  [thus],  not  to  con- 
demn you ;  for  I  have  said  before  that  ye  are  treas- 


or,  affectimu 
oT^ihenUeres' 
money  which 
is  with  you. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


381 


a  CORINTHIANS,  VIL 


'Sy. 


e  ar^iohation. 


^  or%  i^ffweiions* 


i° 


ured  in  our  hearts,  to  die  and  to  live  together. 
(4)  I  have  great  assurance*  before  you,  and  have    4 
much  glorying  in  you ;  and  I  am  full  of  comfort. 
And  joy  greatly  aboundeth  to  me,  in  all  my  afflic- 
tions.    (5)  For,  after  we  came  to  Macedonia,  there    5 
was  no  rest  for  our  body,  but  we  were  distressed  in 
every  thing;  without  was  conflict,  and  within  was 
fear.     (6)  Sut  God  who  comforteth  the  depressed,     6 
comforted  us  by  the  arrival  of  Titus.    (7)  And  not    7 
merely  by  his  arrival,  but  also  by  the  refreshing 
with  which  he  was  refreshed  by  you.    For  he  told 
us  of  your  love  towards  us,  and  of  your  grie^  and 
of  your  zeal  in  our  behalf :  and  when  I  heard  it,  my 
*|oy  was  great     (8)  And  although  I  made  you  saa    8 
>j  the  epistle,  I  do  not  regret  it,  though  1  did  re- 
^et  it ;  for  I  see  that  that  epistle,  though  for  a  time 
It  made  you  sad,  (9)  yet  it  procured  me  joy, — ^not    9 
because  ye  had  sorrow,  but  because  your  sorrow 
brought  you  to  repentance;  for  ye  sorrowed  in 
godly  sorrow;  so  that  ye  received  no  detriment 
from  us.     (10)  For,  sorrowing  on  account  of  God,  10 
worketh  a  conversion**  of  the  soul  which  is  not  re- 
versed, and  a  turning  unto  life :®  but  the  sorrowing 
of  the  world  worketh  death.     (11)  For  behold  this  11 
same  thing,  that  ye  were  distressed  on  account  of 
God,  what  solicitude  it  wrought  in  you,  and  apolo- 
gizing, and  indignation,  and  fear,  and  love,  and  zeal, 
and  revenge  ?     And  in  all  things  ye  have  shown, 
that  ve  are  [now]  pure  in  that  matter.     (12)  And  it  12 
will  be  [seen]  that  I  wrote  to  you,  not  for  the  sake 
of  him  who  did  the  wrong,  nor  for  the  sake  of  him 
who  received  the  wrong,  [onlv,]  but  that  your  solici- 
tude in  respect  to  us  might  oe  known  before  God. 
(13)  Wherefore  we  were  comforted ;  and  with  our  18 
consolation,  we  were  the  more  joyful  for  the  joy  of 
Titus,  because  his  spirit  was  refreshed  by  you  all : 
(14^  so  that  I  was  not  ashamed  of  that  in  which  I  14 
haa  gloried  to  him,  respecting  you ;  but  as  in  every 
thing  we  spoke  the  truth  to  you,  so  also  our  glory- 
ing before  IHtus,  is  found  to  be  in  truth:  (15)  and  15 
also  his  bowels*!  are  the  more  enlarged  towards  you, 
while  he  remembereth  the  submission  of  you  all, 
and  how  ye  received  him  with  fear  and  trembling. 
(16)  I  rejoice,  that  in  every  thing  I  have  full  conn-  16 
dence  in  you. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  CORINTHIANS,    Vlll. 


885 


VIII.  And,  my  brethren,  we  make  known  to  vou  the 
grace  of  God  which  was  conferred  on  the  cnurches 

2  of  the  Macedonians ;  (2)  that  in  the  great  trial  of 
their  afficdon,  there  was  an  abounding  to  their  joy, 
and  the  depth  of  their  poverty  was  exuberant  m 

8  the  riches  of  their  liberality.*^  (8)  For  I  testify 
that,  according  to  their  ability,**  and  beyond  their 

4  ability,  in  the  spontaneity  of  their  mind,  (4)  they 
besought  us,  with  much  entreaty,  that  they  might 
participate  in  the  beneficence  of  the  ministration  to 

6  the  saints.  (5)  And  not  [only]  as  we  had  expected, 
but  they  first  gave  themselves  unto  the  Lord,  and 

6  to  us  by  the  wUl  of  God.  (6)  So  that  we  requested 
Titus,  tnat  as  he  had  begun,  so  he  would  perfect  in 

7  you  also  the  same  beneficence.— (7)  And  as  ye  are 
enriched  in  every  thing,  in  faith,  and  speech,  and 
knowledge,  and  m  all  diligence,  and  in  our  love 
towards  you,  so  abound  ye  in  this  beneficence  also. 

8  (8)  I  do  not  actually  command^'  you,  but  by  the 
promptitude  of  your  fellow  [disciples],  I  would  test 

9  the  sincerity  of  your  love.  (9)  For  ye  know  the 
goodness*!  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  who 
when  he  was  rich,  for  your  sakes  became  poor,  that 

10  by  his  poverty  ye  might  be  made  rich.  (10)  And 
I  urgently  recommend®  to  you,  that  which  is  for 
your  advantage ;  inasmuch  as  ye  began,  a  year  ago. 

11  not  only  to  purpose,  but  also  to  perform.  (11)  Ana 
now  complete  ye  by  action,  what  ye  purposed ;  that 
as  ye  had  a  promptitude  in  your  purposing,  so  ye 
may  fulfill  [it]  in  action,  according  to  your  ability.^ 

12  (12)  For  if  there  is  a  willingness,  a  person  is  ac- 
cepted according  to  what  he  hath,  ana  not  accord- 

18  ing  to  what  he  hath  not.    (18)  For  it  is  not,  that 

others  may  have  easemenl^  and  you  pressure; 
14  (14)  but  that  ye  may  be  on  equality  at  the  present 

time ;  and  that  your  abundance  may  be  [a  supply] 
^  to  their  want ;  that  their  abundance  likewise  may 

be  [a  supply]  to  your  want ;  that  there  may  tie 
16  equality.    (15^  As  it  is  written.  He  who  gathered 

much,  had  notning  over ;  and  he  that  gathered  little, 

16  was  not  deficient. — (16)  But  thanks  be  to  God, 
who  put  into  the  heart  of  Titus  this  solicitude  for 

17  you.  (17)  For  he  received  our  exhortation ;  and, 
because  he  was  very  anxious,  he  cheerfully  set  out 

18  to  visit  you.  (18)  And  we  also  sent  with  him  that 
our  brother,  whose  praise  in  the  gospel  is  ia  alll 


*  or,  nny^Hetiy, 


Sy.  comwumd- 
ing  command, 

Sy.ypni^ 

Sy. 

recommending 

Tccommcnd, 


'  Sy.Jrom  what 
yt  have. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


886 


9  CORINTHIANS,   IX. 


Gr.  oUroifroXoi. 


•  Sy.  lAs  JOO 


the  ohorches;  (19)  inasmuch  as  he  likewise  had  19 
been  expressly  chosen  by  the  churches,  to  acoom- 

ry  me  with  this  beneficence  which  is  ministered 
^  us  to  the  glory  of  God  and  to  our  cordiality.*  20 
(20)  And  we  hereby  guarded,  that  no  one  should  cast 
censure  on  us,  in  prespect  t^  this  abundance  which 
is  ministered  by  us.     (21)  For  we  are  attentive  to  21 
things  commendable,  not  only  before  God,  but  also 
before  men.     (22)  And  we  also  sent  with  them  that  22 
brother  of  ours,  who  hath  often,  and  in  many  things, 
been  proved  ailigent  by  us ;  and  is  now  particu- 
larly ailigent,  from  the  great  confidence  [he  hath] 
in  you.    (28)  And  therefore,  if  Titus  [be  inquired  23 
about],  he  is  my  associate   and   assistant  among 
you :  or  if  our  other  brethren,  they  are  the  l^ates*> 
of  the  churches  of  the  Messiah's  glory.   (24)  There-  24 
fore,  exhibit  ye  to  them,  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
churches,  a  demonstration  of  your  love  and  of  our 
glorying  resj>ecting  you. — (IX.)  And  concerning  IX. 
the  ministration  by  the  saints,  it  would  be  super- 
fluous for  me  to  write  to  you :  (2)  for  I  know  the    2 
goodness  of  Vour  mind ;  and  therefore  I  gloried  of 
you  before  the  Macedonians,  that  Achaia  was  ready 
a  year  ago;   and  vour  zeal  hath  excited  many. 
(8)  Yet  I  sent  the  brethren,  lest  the  glorying  with    8 
wnich  we  have  gloried  in  you  in  regard  to  this 
matter,  should  prove  vain ;  and  that  ye,  as  I  said, 
may  be  ready;  (4)  so  that,  if  the  Macedonians    4 
should  come  with  me,  and  should  find  you  unpre- 

{)ared,  we — ^not  to  say,  ye — should  be  put  to  shame 
or  that  glorying  in  which  we  gloried.    (5)  There-    6 
fore  I  was  carefiil  to  request  these  my  brethren,  to 
go  before  me  unto  you,  that  they  might  make  up 
tnis  benefaction, »  of  which  ye  were  advised  long 
before  to  have  it  ready,  as  being  a  benefaction,  ana 
not  a  matter  of  cupidity.    (6)  And  this  \1  say] :     6 
He  that  soweth  sparingly,  shall  also  reap  sparingly ; 
and  he  that  soweth  bountifdlly,  shall  also  reap 
bountiftdly.    (7)  Every  man,  according  to  his  own    7 
views,  not  with  sadness,  not  by  constraint :  for  the 
Lord  loveth  a  joyous  giver.    (8)  For  it  is  in  the    8 
power  of  God,  to  make  all  good  abound  to  you,  so 
th^t  ye  may  have,  at  all  times,  and  in  every  thing, 
what  is  sufficient  for  you;  and  may  abound  in 
every  good  work.    (9)  As  it  is  written.  He  hath    9 
dispersed  and  given  to  the  poor ;  and  his  righteous- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  CORINTHIANS,   X. 


337 


10 


11 


14 


nesB^  18  established  for  ever.  (10)  Now  he  that 
giveth  seed  to  the  sower,  and  breaa  for  food,  may 
he  give  and  multiply  your  seed,  and  increase  the 
fruits  of  your  righteousness :  (11)  so  that  in  every 
thing,  ye  may  be  enriched  unto  all  liberality,®  to 

12  the  completion  of  our  thanksgiving  to  God.  (12) 
For  the  performance  of  this  ministration,  not  only 
supplieth  the  want  of  the  saints,  but  is  also  rich  in 

IS  many  thanksgivings  to  Gtod.  (13)  For  on  account 
of  the  test  of  this  ministration,  we  glorify  God,  that 
ye  do  subject  yourselves  to  the  profession  of  the 
gospel*!  of  the  Messiah,  and  that  in  your  liberality,® 
ye  communicate  with  them  and  with  all  men: 
(14)  and  they  put  up  prayer  for  vou,  with  much 
love,  because  of  the  abundance  of  the  grace  of  God 

15  that  is  upon  you.  (15)  Thanks  be  to  God  for  his 
unspeakable  gift. 

X.  Now  I,  Paul,  beseech  you,  by  the  mildness  and 
gentleness  of  the  Messiah, — ^although  I  am  mild  to- 
wards  you  when  present,  but  bold  towards  you 
2  when  absent  I— (2)  yet  I  beseech  of  you  that,  when 
I  come,  I  may  not  be  compelled  by  the  boldness 
that  is  in  me  to  be  daring,  as  I  estimate  it,  tovfrards 
the  persons  who  think  we  walk  according  to  the 
flesh.  (8)  For,  although  we  walk  in  the  flesh,  our 
warfare  is  not  after  the  flesh.  (4)  For  the  arms  of 
our  warfare  are  not  those  of  the  nesh,  but  those  of 
the  power  of  God ;»  by  which  we  subdue  rebellious 
castles.  (5)  And  we  demolish  imaginations,  and 
every  lofty  thing  that  exalteth  itself  against  the 
knowledge  of  God,  and  subju^te  all  reasonings  to 
obedience  to  the  Messiah.  (6)  And  we  are  pre- 
pared, when  your  obedience  shall  be  complete,  to 

7  execute  judgment  on  all  the  disobeying. — (7)  Do 
ye  look  on  outward  appearances  ?  If  any  one  is 
confident  in  himself  that  he  is  of  the  Messiah,  let 
him  know,  from  himself,  that  as  he  is  of  the  Mes- 

8  siah,  so  also  are  we.  (8)  For  if  I  should  glory 
somewhat  more,  in  the  authority^  which  our  Lord 
hath  given  me,  I  should  not  be  ashamed  ;  for  he 
gave  it  to  us  for  your  edification,  and  not  for  your 

9  destruction.  (9)  But  I  forbear,  lest  I  should  be 
thourfit  to  terrify  you  terribly,  by  my  epistles. 

10  (10)  For  there  are  some  who  say,  fSis]  epistles  are 
weighty  and  forcible,  but  his  bodily  presence®  is 


S 
4 


6 


^Sy.lZoa^JI 


«  or,  tw^pHeUg. 


or,  iin^pimiy 


or  dkine 
ffower. 


Digitized  by 


Sy. 


Sy.  presence 
of  his  body 

Google 


838 


2  CORINTHIANS  XI. 


*  or,  out  of  our 
province. 


•  Sy.  ajealouMy 
if  God, 


^  By.  Vinm 


11 


12 


13 


14 


weak,  and  Iiis  speech  contemptible.  (11)  But  let 
him  who  saith  so,  consider  this,  that  such  as  we  are 
in  our  epistolary  discourse,  when  absent,  such  also 
are  we  in  action,  when  present  (12)  For  we  dare 
not  value,  or  compare  ourselves,  with  those  who 
vaunt :  but  they,  because  they  compare  themselves 
with  themselves,  are  not  wise.  (13)  But  we  will 
not  glory  beyond  our  measure,d  but  within  the 
measure  of  the  limits  which  Gbd  hath  imparted  to 
us,  that  we  should  reach  as  far  as  you.  (14)  For 
we  do  not  stretch  ourselves,  as  if  not  reachmg  to 
you ;  for  we  do  reach  as  far  as  you  in  the  annund- 
ation  of  the  Messiah.  (15)  And  we  do  not  glory  15 
beyond  our  measure,  in  the  toil  of  others:  but  we 
have  the  hope,  that  when  your  feith  shall  mature, 
we  shall  be  magnified  by  you,  as  [being  within]  our  • 
measure ;  (16)  and  that  we  shall  so  abound  also,  as  16 
to  make  announcements  beyond  you.  It  is  not  in 
the  measure  of  others,  [and]  in  things  ready  pre- 
pared, that  we  will  glory.  (17)  But  let  him  that 
will  glory,  glory  in  the  Lord.  (ISi  For  not  he 
who  praiseth  himself,  is  approved ;  out  he  whom 
the  Lord  praiseth. 


'  Sy.  eommii^ 
ting  commit. 


17 
18 


I  would  that  ye  could  bear  with  me  a  little,  that  XL 
I  might  talk  foolishly :  and  indeed,  bear  ye  with 
me.    (2)  For  I  am  jealous  over  you,  with  a  godly    2 
jealousy :»  for  I  have  espoused  you  to  a  husband 
as  a  chaste  virgin,  whom  I  would  present  to  the 
Messiah.    (8)  But  I  fear,  lest,  as  the  serpent  be-    3 
ffuUed  Eve  by  his  craftiness,  so  your  minds  should 
be  corrupted  from  simplicity  towards  the  Messiah. 
(4)  For  if  he  that  cometh  to  you,  had  proclaimed    4 
to  you  another  Jesus,  whom  we  have  not  proclaim- 
ed ;  or  if  ye  had  received  another  Spirit,  which  ye 
have  not  received;  or  another  gospel,**  which  ye 
have  not  accepted ;  ye  might  well  have  given  as- 
sent.— (5)  For,  I  suppose,  I  came  not  short  of  those    5 
legates  who  most  excel.    (6)  For,  though  I  be  rude    6 
in  speech,  yet  not  in  knowledge ;  but  in  all  things 
we  have  iJeen  manifest  among  you.     (7)  Did  I'  7 
indeed  commit^  an  offence,  by  humbling  myself 
that  ye  might  be  exalted  ?  and  by  proclaiming  the 
gospel  of  God  to  you  gratis?    (8)  And  I  robbed    8 
other  churches,  and  I  took  pay  [of  them]  for  min- 
istering to  you.    (9)  And  when  I  came  among  you    9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  CORINTHIANS,    XL 


889 


10 

11 
12 


and  was  needy,  I  was  burdensome  to  none  of  you ; 
for  the  brethren  who  came  from  Macedonia,  sup- 
plied mj  wants :  and  in  all  things  I  kept  myself — 
and  I  will  keep  myself,  from  being  burdensome  to 
you.  (10)  As  the  truth  of  the  Messiah  is  in  me, 
this  glorying  shall  not  be  made  vain  as  to  me  in 
the  regions  of  Achaia.  (11)  Why?  Because  I 
do  not  love  you  ?  God  knoweth.  (12)  But  what 
I  do,  that  also  I  will  do ;  that  I  may  cut  off  occa- 
sion, from  them  who  seek  occasion:  so  that  in  the 
thing  wherein  they  glory,  they  may  be  found  even 

18  as  we.  {IS)  For  they  are  fidse  legates,  crafty 
workers,  ana  feign  themselves  to  be  legates  of 

14  the  Messiah.  (14)  And  in  this  there  is  nothing 
strange.    For  if  Satan  feigneth  himself  an  angel  oi 

16  light,  (15)  it  is  no  great  thing  if  his  ministers  feign 
themselves  ministers  of  righteousness;  whose  end 

16  shall  be  according  to  their  works. — (16)  Again  I 
sav,  let  no  one  think  of  me,  as  being  a  tool :  or  if 
otherwise,  receive  me  as  a  fool,  that  I  may  glory  a 

17  little.  (17)  What  I  am  [now]  saying,  I  say  not  in 
our  Lord,  but  as  in  folly,  in  this  matter^  of  glory- 

18  ing.    (18)  Because  many  glory  after®  the  flesh,  I 

19  also  will  glory.    (19)  For  ye  hear  with  indulgence 

20  them  who  lack  reason,  seeing  ye  are  wise.  (20) 
And  ye  give  ear  to  him,  who  putteth  you  in  bon- 
dage ;  and  to  him,  who  devoureth  you ;  and  to 
him,  who  taketh  from  you ;  and  to  him,  who  ex« 
alteth  himself  over  you ;  and  to  him,  who  smiteth 

21  you  in  the  face.  (21)  I  speak  as  if  under  contempt : 
I  speak  as  if  we,  were  impotent,  through  deficiency 
of  understanding ;  that  in  whatever  thing  any  one 

22  is  presuming,^  I  also  am  presuming.  (22)  If  they 
are  Hebrews,  so  I  also :  or  if  they  are  Israelites,  I 
also.    If  they  are  the  seed  of  Abraham,  I  also. 

28  (28)  If  thev  are  ministers  of  the  Messiah,  (in  de- 
fect of  unaerstanding,  I  say  it,)  I  am  superior  to 
them :  in  toils  more  than  they,  in  stripes  more  than 
they,  in  bonds  more  than  they,  in  deaths  manv 

24  times.  (24)  B  v  the  Jews,  five  times  was  I  scourged, 

25  each  time  with  forty  stripes  save  one.  (25)  Three 
times  was  I  beaten  with  rods :  at  one  time  I  was 
stoned :  three  times  I  was  in  shipwreck,  by  day  and 
by  night;  I  have  been  in  the  sea,  without  a  ship. 

26  {i6)  £i  joumeyings  many,  in  peril  by  rivers,  m 
penl  by  robbers,  in  peril  from  my  kindbred,  in  peril 


Digitized  by 


OT,  phee, 
or»  in. 


OT,boid, 
daring. 


Google 


340 


2  CORINTHIANS,   XIL 


By. 

I  or,  (^this 
(thing.) 


'  Off  abundance. 


Sy. 


from  Q^ntiles :  I  have  been  in  peril  in  cities ;  I 
have  been  in  peril  in  the  desert,  in  peril  in  the  sea, 
in  peril  from  fisJse  brethren.     (27)   In  toil  and  27 
weariness,  in  much  watching,  in  hunger  and  thirst, 
in  much  &sting,  in  cold  and  nakedness :  (28)  be-  28 
sides  many  other  things,  and  the  thronging  around 
me  every  day,  and  my  anxiety  for  all  the  churches. 
(29)  Who  becometh  weak,  and  I  become  not  weak?  29 
Who  is  stumbled,  and  I  burn  not  ?    (30)  If  I  must  SO 
fflory,  I  will  glory  in  my  infirmities.     (81)  God,  SI 
the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  blessed 
for  ever  and   ever, — ^he  knoweth  that  I  lie  not 
(82)  At  Damascus,  the  commander  of  the  army  of  82 
Aretas  the  king,  guarded  the  city  of  the  Dama- 
scenes, to  seize  me.    (88)  And  from  a  window,  in  a  88 
basket,  they  let  me  down  from  the  wall,  and  I  es- 
caped from  his  hands. — (XII.)  Glorying  must  be,  XIL 
but  it  is  not  profitable :  so  I  proceed  to  visions  and 
revelations  of  our  Lord.     (2)  I  knew  a  man  in  the     2 
Messiah  fourteen   years  ago,  (but  whether  in  a 
body,  or  whether  out  of  a  body,  I  know  not;  God 
knoweth ;)  who  was  caught  up  to  the  third  [region] 
of  heaven.    (3)  And  I  knew  this  same  man ;  (but    8 
whether  in  a  body,  or  out  of  a  body,  I  know  not ; 
God  knoweth ;)  (i)  and  he  was  caught  up  to  Para-    4 
dise,»  and  heard  meflfable  words,**  which  it  is  not 
permitted^  a  man  to  utter.     (5)  Of  him^  I  will    5 
glofy :  but  of  myself  I  will  not  glory,  except  in  my , 
infirmities.     (6)  Yet  if  I  were  (fisposed  to  glory,  I    6 
should  not  be  without  reason;  for  I  declare  the 
truth.     But  I  refrain,  lest  any  one^should  think  of 
me,  beyond  what  he  seeth  in  me  and  heareth  from 
me. — (7)  And,  that  I  might  not  be  uplifted  by  the    7 
excellencye  of  the  revelations,  there  was  imparted 
to  me  a  thorn  in  my  flesh,  the  an^el  of  Satan,  to 
buffet  me,  that  I  might  not  be  upUfted.     (8)  Be-    8 
specting  this,  I  thrice  besought  my  Lord,  that  it 
might  depart  fix)m  me.     (9^  And  ne  said  to  me,     9 
My  grace  is  sufficient  for  tnee ;  for  my  power^  is 
perfected  in  weakness.     Gladly,  thereiore,  will  I 
glory  in  my  infirmities,  that  the  power  of  the  Mes- 
siah may  rest  upon  me.      (10)  Therefore  I  have  10 
pleasure  in  infirmities,  in  reproach,  in  afflictions,  in 
persecutions,  in  distresses,  which  are  for  the  Mes- 
siah's sake :  for  when  I  am  weak,  then  am  I  strong. 
—(11)  Behold,  I  have  become  foolish  in  my  glory-  11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  CORINTHIANS,    XIII. 


S41 


iBg,  for  ye  compelled  me.  For  ye  ought  to  bear 
witness  lor  me ;  because  I  was  inferior  in  nothing 
to  those  legates  who  most  excel,  although  I  was 

12  nothing.  (12)  I  wrought  among  you  the  signsfir  of 
the  legates,  with  all  patience ;  ana  in  prodigies,  and 

18  in  wonders,  and  in  mighty  deeds.**  (13)  For  in 
what  fell  ye  short  of  the  other  churches,  except  in 
this,  that  I  was  not  burdensome  to  you  ?     Forgive 

14  me  this  fault  (14)  Behold,  this  third  time  I  am 
ready  to  come  to  you,  and  I  will  not  burden  you; 
for  1  seek  not  yours,  but  you :  for  children  ought 
not  to  lay  up  treasures  for  the  parents,  but  the  pa- 

15  rents  for  their  children.  (15)  And  cheerfully  will 
I  both  pay  [my]  expenses,  and  also  give  myself  for 
your  souls;  althou^  the  more  I  love  you,  the  less 

16  ve  love  me. — (16)  But  perhaps,  though  I  was  not 
burdensome  to  you,  yet,  like  a  cunning  man,  I 

17  filched  from  you  by  craftiness  I  (17)  Was  it  by  the 
hand  of  some  other  person  whom  I  sent  tovou, 

18  that  I  pilfered  from  you  ?  (18)  I  requested  Titus, 
and  with  him  I  sent  the  brethren :  did  Titus  pilfer 
any  thing  from  you?  Did  we  not  walk  in  one 
spirit,  and  in  the  same  steps  ? 

19  Do  ye  again  suppose,  that  we  would  apologize 
to  you  ?  Before  Grod,  in  the  Messiah  we  speak : 
and  all  these  things,  my  beloved,  [are]  for  the  sake 

20  of  your  edification.  (20)  For  I  fear,  lest  I  should 
come  to  you  and  not  find  you  such  as  I  would 
wish ;  and  lest  I  also  should  be  found  by  you,  such 
as  ye  would  not  wish ;  lest  [there  should  be]  con- 
tention, and  envying,  and  anger,  and  obstinacy, 
and  slandering,  and  murmuring,  and  insolence,  and 

21  commotion;  (21)  lest,  when  I  come  to  you,  my 
God  should  humble  me ;  and  I  should  mourn  over 
many,  who  have  sinned,  and  have  not  repented  of 
the  impurity,  the  whoredom,  and  the  lasciviousness, 
which  they  have  committed. 

XHL  This  is  the  third  time  that  I  have  prepared  to 
oome  to  you ;  that,  by  the  mouth  of  two  or  three 
2  witnesses,  every  word^  may  be  established.  (2)  ' 
have  before  said  to  you,  and  again  I  say  to  you 
beforehand,  (as  also  1  said  to  you  a  second  time, 
while  I  was  with  you  ;  and  now  also,  while  absent, 
I  write  to  those  who  have  sinned  and  to  the  others,) 
8  that  if  I  come  again,  I  will  not  spare  •  (3)  because 


sy.p: 


*  or,  thing  \\l£^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


342 


2  CORINTHIANS,    Xlll. 


or,  m. 


'  Sy. 


•Sy  ^Q^ 


ye  demand  proo^  that  it  is  the  Messiah  that  speak- 
eth  bj  me,  who  hath  not  been  powerless  among 
jou,  but  powerful  among  you.    (4)  For,  though  he    4 
was  crucified  in  weakness,  yet  he  liveth  with^  the 
power  of  God.    We  also  are  weak  with  him ;  yet 
we  are  alive  with  him,  by  that  power  of  Gt>d  which 
is  among  you.    (5)  Examine  yourselves,  whether    5 
ye  stand  in  the  faith :  prove  yourselves.    Do  ye 
not  acknowledge  that  Jesus  the  Msesiah  is  in  you? 
And  if  [he  is]  not,  ye  are  reprobates.    (6)  But,  I    6 
trust,  ye  will  know  that  we  are  hot  reprobate& 
(7)  And  I  beseech  God,  that  there  may  be  no  evil    7 
in  you ;  so  that  tb^  proof  of  us  may  appear :  and 
yet,  that  ye  may  be  doers  of  good  things,  though 
we  be  as  reprobates.    (8)  For  we  can  do  nothing    8 
against  the  truth,  but  [only]  for  the  truth.    (9)  And    9 
we  rejoice,  when  we  are  weak  and  ye  are  strong. 
And  this  also  we  pray  for,  that  ye  may  be  per- 
fected.®    (10)   Therefore,   while  absent,   I  write  10 
these  things ;  lest  when  I  come,  I  should  act  with 
rigor,  according  to  the  authority^  which  my  Lord 
hath  given  me  for  your  edification,  and  not  for  your 
destruction. 

Finally,  mv  brethren,  rejoice,  and  be  perfected,  11 
and  be  comfcrted :  and  may  harmony  and  quiet- 
)ss  be  among  you ;  and  the  God  of  love  and  of 
ace  will    be  with    you.— (12)  Salute   ye    one  12 
another,  with  a  holy  kiss.    AH  the  saints  salute 
jrou.    (18)  The  peace®  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  13 
siah,  and  the  love  of  Gt>d,  and  the  communion.of 
the  Holy  Spirit  be  with  you  all.    Amen. 


End  (fthateeondmsiletotheOfrinihiani:  wkkkwaMwrUten 
from  PhUippi  qf  Macedoma^  and  was  went  by  ike  hands  cf 
Titus. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Galatiaiuk 


8 


Paul,  a  legate,  not  from  men,  nor  by  man,  but 
bj  Jeans  the  Messiah,  and  God  his  Father,  who 
ndaed  him  from  the  dead ;  (2)  and  all  the  brethren 
who  are  with  me ;  unto  the  churches  which  are  in 
GWatia.  (8)  Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace,  from 
GK>d  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 

4  siah ;  (4)  who  gave  himself  for  our  sins,  that  he 
might  deliver  us  from  this  evil  world,*  agreeably 

5  to  the  pleasure  of  God  our  Father :  (5)  to  whom 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

6  I  admire,  how  soon  ye  have  turned  from  the 
Messiah,  who  called  you  by  his  grace,  unto  another 

7  gospel  ;*>  (7)  which  doth  not  exist,  except  as  there 
are  some  who  would  disquiet  you,  and  are  disposed 

8  to  pervert  the  gospel  of  the  Messiah.  (8)  But  if 
we,  or  an  angel  from  heaven,  should  announce  to 
you  differently  from  what  we  have  announced  to 
you,  let  him  be  accursed.^  (9)  As  I  have  just  said, 
and  now  I  again  say  it,  that  if  any  one  announce 
to  you  differently  from  what  ye  received,  let  him 
be  accursed.  (10)  For  do  I  now  persuade  meiL  or 
God  ?  Or  do  I  seek  to  please  men  ?  For  if  I  nad 
till  now  pleased  men,  I  should  not  have  been  a 

11  servant  of  the  Messiah. — (11)  But  I  make  known 
to  you,  my  brethren,  that  the  gospel*^  announced 

12  by  me,  was  not  from  man.  (12)  For  I  did  not  re- 
ceive it  and  learn  it  from  man,  but  [I  had  it]  by 

18  revelation  from  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (18)  For  ye 
have  heard  of  my  former  course  of  life  in  Judaism, 
that  I  persecuted  the  church  of  God  exceedingly, 

14  and  destroyed  it :  (14)  and  that  I  went  much  far- 
ther in  Judaism  than  many  of  my  contemporaries 
who  were  of  my  nation,  and  was  peculiarly  zealous 

15  for  the  doctrine  of  my  fathers.  (15)  But  when  it 
pleased  him,  who  separated  me  from  my  mother's 


9 


10 


Sy   ]KfS  <^ 


Sy.  I 


Sy.!>OM-» 


Sy.  V;nm 


Digitized  by 


Google 


841 


6ALATIANS,  II. 


•  or,  tn. 


'  Gt.  Peter. 


f   or,  by /ace. 


^  or,  on  iiccount 
of- 


•  Sy.  to  6c  some- 
thing. 

•  OTf  privatdy. 

•  Sy. 

an  Aramaean, 


d   Sy.  ^ZfjQflD 

•  or,  to  be  some- 
thing. 


'  Gr.  Peter, 


16 


17 
18 


19 
20 


womb|  and  called  me  by  his  grace,  (16)  to  reveal 
his  Son  bv«  me,  that  I  should  proclaim  him  among 
the  Gtentiles ;  forthwith,  I  did  not  open  it  to  flesh 
and  blood ;  (17)  nor  did  I  go  to  Jeniflalem,  to  them 
who  were  legates  before  me ;  but  I  went  into  Ara- 
bia, and  returned  again  to  Damascus:  (18)  and 
after  three  years,  I  went  to  Jerusalem  to  see  Ce- 
phas;^ and  I  remained  with  him  fifteen  days. 
(19)  But  others  of  the  legates  I  saw  not,  except 
James,  our  Lord's  brother.  (20J  In  the  things 
which  I  am  writing  to  you,  behold,  before  God  1  I 
lie  not.  (21J  And  after  that,  I  went  to  the  regions  21 
of  Syria  ana  Cilicia.  (22)  And  the  churches  in  22 
Judaea  which  were  in  the  Messiah,  did  not  know 
me  persondly  :fir  (23)  but  this  only  had  they  heard,  28 
that  he  who  before  persecuted  us,  now  preacheth 
that  fisdth  which  in  time  preceding  he  subverted: 
(24)  and  they  glorified  God  in^  me.— (IL)  And  IL 
again,  after  fourteen  years,  I  went  up  to  Jerusalem 
with  Barnabas;  and  I  took  with  me  Titus.  (2)  2 
And  I  went  up  by  revelation :  and  I  explained  to 
them  the  gospel  which  I  announce  among  the  Gen- 
tiles ;  and  I  stated  it  to  them  who  were  esteemed 
prominent, »  between  myself  and  them:^  lest  I 
should  have  run,  or  might  run  in  vain.  (3)  Also 
Titus,  who  was  with  me,  and  was  a  Gentile,^  was 
not  compelled  to  be  circumcised.  (4)  And  in  re- 
gard to  tne  false  brethren,  who  had  crept  in  to  spy 
out  the  liberty  we  have  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  in 
order  to  bring  me  under  subjection;  (5)  not  for 
the  space  of  an  hour,  did  we  throw  ourselves  into 
subjection  to  them ;  so  that  the  truth  of  the  gospel^ 
might  remain  with  you.  (6)  And  they  who  were 
esteemed  prominent,®  (what  they  were,  I  care  not; 
for  God  regardeth  not  the  persons  of  men,) — even 
these  persons  added  nothing  to  me.  (7)  But,  other- 
wise ;  for  they  saw,  that  the  gospel  of  the  uncir- 
cumcision  was  intrusted  to  me,  as  to  Cephas^  was 
intrusted  that  of  the  circumcision.  (8)  For  he  that 
was  operative  with  Cephas  in  the  legateship  of  the 
droimicision,  was  also  operative  with  me  in  the 
legateship  of  the  Gentiles.  (9)  And  James,  Ce- 
phas, and  John,  who  were  accounted  pillars,  when 
they  perceived  the  grace  that  was  given  to  me, 
gave  to  me  and  Barnabas  the  right  hand  of  fellow- 
ship ;  that  we  [should  labor]  among  the  Gentiles, 


8 


6 


8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GALATIANS,   III. 


845 


10  and  they  among  the  circumcision.  (10)  Only 
[they  desired]  that  we  would  be  mindftd  of  the 
neeay;  and  I  was  solicitous  to  do  the  same. — 

11,  (11)  But  when  Cephasfir  was  come  to  Antioch,  I 
rebuked  him  to  his  fisice ;  because  they  were  stum- 

12  bled  by  him.  (12)  For  before  certain  ones  came 
from  James,  he  ate  with  the  Gentiles :  but  when 
they  came,  he  withdrew  himself  and  separated ; 
because  he  was  afraid  of  them  of  the  circimicision. 

18  (13)  And  the  rest  of  the  Jews  also  were  with  him 
in  this  thing ;  insomuch  that  even  Barnabas  was 

14  induced  to  regard  persons.  (14^  And  when  I  saw, 
that  they  did  not  walk  correctly,  in  the  truth  of 
the  gospel,  *»  I  said  to  Cephas,  before  them  all :  If 
thou  art  a  Jew,  and  livest  in  the  Gentile  way,  and 
not  in  the  Jewish,  why  dost  thou  compel  the  Gen- 

15  tiles  to  live  in  the  Jewish  way  ?  (15)  For  if  we, 
who  are  Jews  by  nature,  and  are  not  sinners  of  the 

16  Gentiles,  (16) — l^ecause  we  know  that  a  man  is  not 
made  just*  by  the  works  of  the  law,  but  by  feith  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah; — even  we  have  believed  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  in  order  to  be  made  just  by 
fidth  in  the  Messiah,  and  not  by  the  works  of  the 
law :  for,  by  the  deeds  of  the  law,  no  flesh  is  made 

17  iust  ^  (17)  And  if,  while  we  seek  to  become  just 
by  the  Messiah,  we  are  found  to  be  ourselves  sin- 
ners, is  Jesus-  the  Messiah  therefore  the  minister  of 

18  sin  ?  Far  be  it  I  (18)  For  if  I  should  build  up 
again  the  things  I  had  demolished,  I  should  show 

19  myself  to  be  a  transgressor  of  the  precept  (19J  For 
I,  by  the  law,  have  oecome  dead  to  the  law,  tnat  I 
might  live  to  God ;  and  I  am  crucified  with  the 

20  Messiah.  (20)  And  henceforth  it  is  no  more  I  who 
live,  but  the  Messiah  liveth  in  me :  and  the  life  I 
now  live  in  the  flesh,  I  live  by  faith  in  the  Son  of 

21  God,  who  loved  me  and  gave  himself  for  me.  (21)  I 
do  not  spurn  the  grace  of  God.  For  if  righteous- 
ness is  by  means  of  the  law,  the  Messiah  died  in 
vain. 

nX  0  ye  Galatians,  deficient  in  understanding! 
Who  hath  fascinated  you  ?  For  lo,  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah hath  been  portrayed  as  in  a  picture,  crucified 
2  before  your  eyes.  (2)  This  only  would  I  learn 
from  you,  Was  it  by  works  of  the  law,  that  ye 
received  the  Spirit?  or  by  the  hearing  of  fidth? 


»  Gt.  Peter. 


Sy. 


i   or,  justified. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


846 


GALATIANS,  IIL 


Sy.)]I>^ 


'  or,  be  justified. 


or,  ujuttifiei. 
I  or,  be  saved. 


Sy.  \a^y 


Sy.  IaJ^^SD 


s 


9 


(3)  Are  je  so  foolish,  that  having  began  in  the 
Spirit,  ye  now  would  consummate  in  the  flesh? 

(4)  And  have  ye  borne  all  these  things  in  yain  ? 
And  I  would,  it  were  in  vain  1  (5^  He  therefore 
who  giveth  the  Spirit  in  you,  and  who  worketh 
miracles^  among  you,  [doth  he  these  things]  by  the 
deeds  of  the  law?  or  by  the  hearing  of  faith? 
(6)  In  like  manner  Abraham  believed  Gbd,  and  it 
was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness.  (7)  Know 
ye,  therefore,  that  those  who  are  of  faith,  they  are 
the  children  of  Abraham.  (8)  For,  because  Gkxi 
knew  beforehand  that  the  Gentiles  would  be  made 
just*>  by  £uth,  he  preannounced  it  to  Abraham ;  as 
saith  the  holy  scripture,  In  thee  shall  all  nations  be 
blessed,  (9)  Believers,  therefore,  it  is,  who  are 
blessed  with  believing  Abraham.  (10)  For  they  10 
who  are  of  the  deeds  of  the  law,  are  under  the 
curse :  for  it  is  written,  Cursed  is  every  one  who 
shall  not  do  every  thing  written  in  this  law. 
(11)  And  that  no  one  becometh  just«  before  God,  11 
by  the  law,  is  manifest :  because  it  is  written.  The 
just  by  faith,  shall  live.^  (12)  Now  the  law  is  not 
of  fiuth ;  but,  whoever  shall  do  the  things  written 
in  it,  shall  live  by  them.  (18)  But  the  Messiah 
hath  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  and 
hath  been  a  curse  for  us ;  (for  it  is  written.  Cursed 

is  every  one  that  is  hanged  on  a  tree ;)  (14)  that  14 
the  blessing  of  Abraham  might  be  on  the  Gentiles, 
through  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  that  we  might  receive 
the  promise  of  the  Spirit  by  faith. — (15)  My  breth- 
ren^  I  speak  as  among  men;  a  man's  covenant* 
which  is  confirmed,  no  one  setteth  aside,  or  chan- 
geth  any  thing  in  it  (16)  Now  to  Abraham  was 
the  promise  nmde,  and  to  his  seed.  And  it  said  to 
him,  not,  to  thy  seeds,  as  being  many ;  but  to  thy 
seed,  as  being  one,  which  is  the  Messiah.  (IT)  And  17 
this  I  say ;  That  the  covenant  which  was  previously 
confirmed  by  God  in  the  Messiah,  the  law  which 
was  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after,  cannot  set 
it  aside,  and  nullify  the  promise.  (18J  And  if  the 
inheritance  were  by  the  law,  it  would  not  be  by 
promise :  but  God  gave  it  to  Abraham  by  promise. 
What  then  is  the  law?  It  was  added  on  ac- 
count of  transgression,  until  that  seed  should 
come,  to  whom  belonged  the  promise:  and  the 
law  was  given  by  angels  through  a  mediator/ 


12 
18 


16 


16 


18 


19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GALATIANS,   IV. 


847 


21 


22 


28 


(20)  Now  a  mediator  is  not  of  one;  but  God  is 
one.  (21)  Is  the  law  then  opposed  to  the  promise 
of  God?  Far  be  it  For  if  a  law  had  been 
given,  which  could  make  alive, »  certainly,  r^h- 
teousness  would  have  been  by  the  law.  (22)  But 
the  scripture  hath  inclosed  all  under  sin,  that  the 
promise  by  faith  in  Jesus  the  Messiah  might  be 

28  given  to  them  that  believe.  (23)  But  before  the 
Mth  came,  the  law  kept  us  shut  up  unto  the  fidth 

24  that  was  to  be  revealeo.  (24)  The  law,  therefore, 
was  a  monitor**  for  us  unto  the  Messiah,  that  we 

25  might  become  just*  by  fiiith.  (26)  But  the  faith 
having   come,  we  are   not    under  the  monitor. 

26  (26)  For  ye  are  all  the  children  of  God,  by  ^th  in 

27  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (27J  For  they  who  have  been 
baptized  into  the  Messian,  have  put  on  th^  Messiah. 
(28)  There  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  neither 
slave  nor  free-born,  neither  male  nor  female;  fop 

29  ye  are  all  one  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (29)  And  if 

Je  are  the  Messiah's,  then  are  ye  the  seed  of  Abra- 
am,  and  heirs  by  the  promise. — (IV.)  But  I  say, 
that  the  heir,  so  long  as  he  is  a  child,  diflfereth  not 
2  from  a  servant,  although  he  is  lord  of  all ;  (2)  but 
he  is  under  supervisors  and  stewards,  until  the  time 
established  by  his  father.  (3)  So  also  we,  while 
we  were  children,  were  in  subordination  under  the 
elements^  of  the  world.  (4)  But  when  the  consum- 
mation of  the  time  arriveo,  God  sent  forth  his  Son ; 
and  he  was  from  a  woman,  and  was  under  the  law ; 

5  (5)  that  he  might  redeem  them  that  were  under  the 
law ;  and  that  we  might  receive  the  adoption  of 

6  sons.  (6)  And,  because  ye  are  sons,  God  hath  sent 
forth  the  Spirit  of  his  Son  into  your  hearts,  who 

7  crieth,  Father,  our  Father.**  (7)  Wherefore,  ye 
are  no  longer  servants,  but  sons ;  and  if  sons,  then 

8  heirs  of  God,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (8)  For 
then,  when  ye  knew  not  God,  ye  served  them  who 

9  in  their  nature  are  not  gods.  (9^  But  now,  since 
ve  have  known  God, — or  rather,  nave  been  known 
oy  God,  ye  turn  yourselves  again  to  the  weak  and 
beggarly  elements,  and  wish  again  to  be  under 
them  I     (10)  Ye  observe  days  and  moons,  and  set 

11  times,  and  years  I     (11)  I  am  afraid,  lest  I  have 

12  labored  among  vou  in  vain.  (12)  Be  ye  like  me ; 
>)ecause  I  have  oeen  like  you. 

My  brethren,  I  beseech  you.    Ye  have  not  in- 


8 


10 


»  or. 


or,  bejuttHUd 


Sy. 


Gr.  f  oix«r«. 


Sy. 

^1  H 


Digitized  by 


Google 


348 


GALATIANS,   IV. 


allegories, 
^Sy. 


juied  IU6  at  all.    (18)  For  ye  know,  that  under  tlie  18 
infirmity  of  my  flesh,  T  at  nrst  announced  the  gosr 
pel  to  you ;  (14)  and  the  trial  in  my  flesh,  ye  did  14 
not  despise  nor  nauseate :  but  ye  received  me  as 
an  angel  of  God,  and  as  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (15)  16 
Where  then  is  your  blessedness?    For  I  testify  or 
you,  that  if  it  had  been  possible,  ye  would  have 
plucked  out  your  eyes,  and  have  given  them  to 
me.    (16)  Have  I  become  an  enemy  to  you,  by  16 
preaching  to  you  the  truth  ? — (17)  They  are  zealous  17 
towards  you,  yet  not  for  good ;  but  they  wish  to 
shut  you  up,  that  ye  may  be  zealous  towards  them. 
(18)  And  It  is  a  good  thing  to  be  zealous  at  all  18 
times  in  good  things ;  and  not  merely  when  I  am 
present  with  you.     (19)  [Ye  are]  my  children,  of  19 
whom  I  travail  in  birth  again,  tUl  the  Messiah  be 
formed  in  you.     (20)  And  I  could  wish  to  be  now  20 
with  you,  and  to  change  the  tone  of  my  voice ;  be- 
cause I  am  astonished  at  jou. — (21)  Tell  me,  ye  21 
who  desire  to  be  under  the  law,  do  ye  not  hear  tne 
law?    (22)  For  it  is  written,  that  Abraham  had  22 
two  sons,  one  by  the  bondmaid,  and  one  by  the 
free  woman.    (23)  But  he  that  was  by  the  bond-  23 
maid,  was  bom  after  the  flesh ;  and  he  that  was  by 
the  free  woman,  was  by  the  promise.    (24)  And  24 
these  are  allegorical^  of  the  two  covenants  ;<^  the 
one  from  mount  Sinai,  which  bringeth  forth  for 
bondage,  is  Hagar.     (25)  For  Hagar  is  the  mount  25 
Sinai  in  Arabia,  and  correspondeth  with  the  pres- 
ent Jerusalem,  and  is  serving  in  bondage,  she  and 
her  children.     (26)  But  the«^rusalem  above,  is  the  26 
free  woman,  who  is  the  mother  of  us.     (27)  For  27 
it  is  written.  Be  joyful,  thou  barren,  who  bearest 
not:  exult  and  shout,  thou  who  hast  not  travailed: 
for  more  numerous  are  the  children  of  the  desolate 
than  the  children  of  the  married  woman.    (28)  Now  28 
we,  my  brethren,  like  Isaac,  are  the  children  of  the 
promise.    (29)  And  as  then,  he  that  was  bom  after  29 
the  flesh,  persecuted  him  [who  was  bom]  of  the 
Spirit;  so  also  [is  it]  now.     (30)  But  what  saith  80 
the  scripture?     Oast  out  the  bondmaid,  and  her 
son ;  because  the  son  of  the  bondmaid  shall  not  in- 
herit with  the  son  of  the  free  woman.    (31)  So  81 
then,  my  brethren,  we  are  not  sons  of  the  bond- 
woman, but  sons  of  the  free  woman. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


GALATIANS,   V. 


849 


Y.  Stand  fast,  therefore,  in  the  liberty  ^th  which 
the  Messiah  hath  made  us  free ;  and  be  not  sub* 

2  jected  again  to  the  yoke  of  bondage.  (2)  Behold, 
i  Paul  say  to  you.  That  if  ye  become  circumcised, 

3  the  Messiah  is  of  no  advantage  to  you.  (8)  And 
again,  I  testify  to  every  one  who  becometh  circum- 
cised, that  he  is  bound*  to  fulfill  the  whole  law. 

4  (4)  Ye  have  renounced  the  Messiah,  ye  who  seek 
justification  by  the  law:  and  ye  have  apostatized 

5  from  grace.  (S)  For  we,  through  the  Smrit,  which 
is  from  faith,  are  waiting  for  the  hope  of  righteous- 

6  ness.  (6)  For,  in  the  Messiah  Jesus,  circumcision 
is  nothing,  neither  is  uncircumcision,  but  the  faith 

7  that  is  perfected  by  love.  (7)  Ye  did  run  well : 
who  hath  interrupted  you,  that  ye  acquiesce  not  in 

8  the  truth  ?    (S)  The  bias  of  your  mind*>  is  not  from 

9  him  who  called  you.  '  (9)  A  little  leaven  leaveneth 

10  the  whole  mass.  (10)  I  confide  in  you  through 
our  Lord,  that  ye  will  entertain  no  other  thoughts. 
And  he  that  disquieteth  you,  shall  bear  his  judg- 

11  ment,  whoever  he  may  be.  (11)  And  I,  my  breth- 
ren, if  I  still  preached  circumcision,  why  should  I 
suffer  persecution  ?    Hath  the  offensiveness  of  the 

12  cross  ceased  ?  (12)  But  I  would,  that  they  who 
disquiet  you,  were  actually  cut  off.^ 

18  And  ye,  my  brethren,  have  been  called  into 
liberty :  only  let  not  your  liberty  be  an  occasion  to 
the  flesh;    out,  by  love,  be  ye  servants  to  each 

14  other.  (14)  For  the  whole  law  is  fulfilled  in  one 
sentence  ;^  in  this.  Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as 

15  thyself  (15)  But  if  ye  bite  and  devour  one 
another,  beware,  lest  ye  be  consumed  one  by  anoth- 

16  er.-^16)  And  I  say :  Walk  ye  in  the  Spirit ;  and 

17  never  follow®  the  cravings  of  the  flesh.  (17)  For 
the  flesh  craveth  that  which  is  repugnant  to  the 
Spirit;  and  the  Sprit  craveth  that  which  is  repug- 
nant to  the  flesh :  and  the  two  are  the  opposites  of 
each  other,  so  that  ye  do  not  that  which  ye  desire. 

18  (18J  But  if  ye  are  guided  by  the  Spirit,  ye  are  not 

19  under  the  law.  (19)  For  the  works  of  the  flesh*  are 
known,  which  arc/s^horedom,  impurity,  lascivious- 

20  ness,  (20)  idol-wdrship,  magic,  malice,  contention, 

21  rivalry,  wrath,  strife,  divisions,  discords,  (21)  envy, 
murder,  drunkenness,  revelling,  and  all  the  liKe 
things.  And  thev  who  perpetrate  these  things,  as 
I  have  before  told  you,  and  also  now  tell  you,  do 


Sy.  O^i  »»| 


^Sj. 


^nfflaft 


8y.  ctOiing 
toere  cut  off 


*  or,  loard. 


•  or,  do. 


A 


Digitized  by 


Google 


860 


GALATIANS,   VL 


^  at^  ajfectums. 


■  or,  fwlotm. 


'  QTj  hn  wkioh. 


not  inherit  the  kingdom  of  Ood.    (22)  But  the  22 
fruits  of  the  Spirit  are,  love,  joy,  peace,  long  suffer- 
ing, suavity,  kindness,  fidelity,  modesty,  patience. 
(23)  Against  these  there  standeth  no  law.   (24")  And  23 
they  who  are  of  the  Messiah,  have  crucinea  their  24 
flesh,  with  all  its  passions^  and  its  cravings.    (25)  25 
Let  us  therefore  live  in  the  Spirit ;  and  let  us  press 
on  after  the  Spirit.    (26)  And  let  us  not  be  vain-  26 
glorious,  despismg  one  another,  and  envying  one 
another. 

My  brethren,  if  one  of  you  should  be  overtaken  VL 
in  a  feult,  do  ye  who  are  of  the  Spirit  recover^  him, 
in  a  spirit  of  meekness :  and  be  ye  cautious,  lest  ye 
also  be  tempted.     (2)  And  bear  ye  one  another's    2 
burdens,  that  so  ve  may  fulfill  the  law  of  the  Mes- 
siah.    (8)  For  if  any  one  thinketh  himself  to  be    8 
something,  when  he  is  not,  he  deceiveth  himself. 
(4)  But  let  a  man  examine  his  own  conduct ;  and    4 
then  his  glorying  will  be  within  himself,  and  not 
in  others.    (6)  For  every  man  must  take  up  his    6 
own  load. — (6)  And  let  him  that  heareth  the  word,     6 
communicate  to  him  who  instructeth  him,  in  all 
good  things. — (7)  Do  not  mistake ;  God  is  not  de-    7 
oeived ;  for  what  a  man  soweth,  that  also  will  he 
reap.    (8)  He  who  soweth  in  the  flesh,  reapeth    8 
firom  the  flesh  corruption:  and  he  who  soweth  in 
the  Spirit,  will  from  the  Spirit  reap  life  everlasting. 
(9)  And  while  we  do  what  is  good,  let  it  not  be    9 
wearisome  to  us;  for  the  time  will  come  when  we 
shall  reap,  and  it  will  not  be  tedious  to  us.     (10)  10 
Now,  therefore,  while  we  have  the  opportunity,  let 
us  practice  good  works  towards  all  men,  and  espe- 
cially toward  them  of  the  household  of  faith. 

Behold,  this  epistle  have  I  written  to  you  with  11 
my  own  hand.    (12)  They  who  are  disposed  to  12 
glory  in  the  flesh,  they  urge  you  to  become  circum- 
cised, only  that  they  may  not  be  persecuted  on 
account  of  the  cross  of  the  Messiah.     (18)  For  13 
not  even  they  themselves,  who  are  circumcised, 
hoeip  the  law :  but  they  wish  you  to  become  cir- 
cumcised,  that    they   may   glory  in   your  flesh. 
(14)  But  as  for  me,  let  me  not  glory,  except  in  the  14 
cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  by  whom*> 
the  world  is  crucified  to  me,  and  I  am  crucified  to 
the  world.    (15)  For  circumcision  is  nothing;  nei-  15 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EPHESIANS,   1. 


361 


16  ther  is  uncircumcision ;  but  a  new  creatioa.^  (16) 
And  they  who  press  forward  in  this  path,  peace  be 
on  them,  and  mercy ;  and  on  the  Israel  or  God. — 

17  (17)  Henceforth  let  no  one  put  trouble  upon  me; 
for  T  bear  in  my  body  the  maiks  oTour  Lord  Jesus 

18  the  Messiah. — (l8)  My  brethren,  the  grace  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  be  with  your  spirit. 
Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  the  QakUiam  ;  which  uhu  written  from 
Rome. 


•Sy. 


♦ 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Ephesians. 


L  Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  pleas- 
ure of  God,  to  them  who  are  at  Ephesus,  sanctified^ 

2  and  believing  in  Jesus  the  Messiah :  (2^  Peace  be 
with  you,  and  grace  from  God  our  Father,  and 
from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

8  Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  who  hath  blessed  us  with  all  blessings  of 

4  the  Spirit  in  heaven,  by  the  Messiah :  (4)  accord- 
ing as  he  had  previously  chosen*  us  in  him,  before 
the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  might  be  holy 
and  without  blame  before  him ;  and,  in  love,  pre- 

5  destinated*>  us  for  himself;  (5)  and  adopted  us  for 
sons,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  as  was  agreeable  to  his 

6  pleasure :  (6]^  that  the  glory  of  his  grace  might  be 
glorified,  which  he  poured  upon  us  by  his  Beloved 

7  One ;  (7)  by  whom  we  have  redemption, «  and  the 
forgiveness  of  sins  by  his  blood,  according  to  the 

8  riches  of  his  grace,^  (8)  which  hath  abounded  in 
us,  in  all  wisdom  and  all  spiritual  understanding. 

9  (9)  And  he  hath  made  us  know  the  mystery  of  his 
pleasure,  which  he  had  before  determined  in  him- 

10  self  to  accomplish,  (10)  in  the  dispensation  of  the 
fiillness  of  times ;  that  all  things  might  again  be 
made  new  in  the  Messiah,  things  in  heaven  and 


•Sy. 

'  Sy.  ^io*) 

•Sy.)xo}a0 


Digitized  by 


Google 


868 


EPHESIANS,   II. 


•By. 


or,  MiaatMm. 


K  or,  ore  taved. 


^Sr.p^M 


[thincs]  on  earth.    (11)  And  in  him  we  are  elected,^  1 1 
accoraing  as  he  predestined®  us  and  willed,  who 
worketh  all  things  according  to  the  counsel  of  his 
pleasure ;  (12)  that  we  should  be  they  who  first  12 
hoped  in  the  Messiah,  to  the  honor  of  his  glory. 
(Id)  In  whom,  ye  also  have  heard  the  word  of  13 
truth,  which  is  the  gospel  of  your  life,^  and  have 
believed  in  him ;  and  nave  been  sealed  with  the 
Holy  Spirit,  who  was  promised,  (14)  who   is  the  14 
earnest  of  our  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of 
them  that  are  alive,  fir  and  for  the  praise  of  his  glory. 

Therefore,  lo  I  also,  since  I  heard  of  your  faith  15^ 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  of  your  love 
towards  all  the  saints,  (16)  cease  not  to  give  thanks  16 
on  your  account,  and  to  remember  you  in  my  pray- 
ers; (17)  that  the  God  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes-  17 
siah,  the  Father  of  glory,  may  give  to  you  the 
Spirit  of  wisdom  and  of  revelation,  in  the  recogni- 
tion of  him ;  (18)  and  that  the  eyes  of  your  hearts  18 
may  be  enlightened,  so  that  ye  may  know  what  is 
the  hope  of  his  calling,  and  what  the  riches  of  the 
glory  of  his  inheritance  in  the  saints;   (19)  and  19 
what  is  the  excellence  of  the  majestv  of  his  power** 
in  us  who  believe ;  according  to  the  efficiency  of 
the  strength  of  his  power,  (20)  which  he  put  forth  20 
in  the  Messiah,  and  raised  him  from  the  dead,  and 
eeated  him  at  his  right  hand  in  heaven,  (21)  high  21 
above  all  principalities,  and  authorities,  and  powers, 
and  lordships,  and  above  every  name  that  is  named, 
not  only  in  this  world  but  also  in  that  to  come : 
(22)  and  he  hath  subjected  all  things  under  his  22 
feet;  and  hath  given  him  who  is  high  over  all,  to 
be  the  head  of  the  church ;»  (23)  which  is  his  bodv,  23 
and   the  fullness  of  him   who  filleth  all  in  all: 
QL)  and  also  you,  [he  filleth,]  who  were  dead  in  IL 
your  sins,  and  in  your  offences,  (2)  in  the  which    2 
ye  before  walked,  according  to  the  worldliness  of 
this  world,  and  according  to  the  pleasure  of  the 
prince  potentate  of  the  air,  that  spirit  which  is  ac- 
tive in  the  children  of  disobedience :  (3)  in  which    S 
deeds  we  also,  formerly,  were  conversant,- in  the 
cravings  of  our  flesh ;  and  we  did  the  pleasure  of 
our  flesh,  and  of  our  mind,  and  were  altogether  the 
children  of  wrath,  like  the  rest    (4)  But  God  who    4 
is  rich  in  his  mercies,  because  of  the  great  love  with 
which  he  loved  us,  (5)  when  we  were  dead  in  our     5 


Digitized  by 


Google 


KPHESIANS,   III. 


353 


ons,  quickened  us  with  the  Messiah,  and  rescued^ 

6  us  by  his  srace;  (6)  and  resuscitated  us  with  him, 
and  seatea  us  with  him  in  heaven,  in  Jesus  the 

7  Messiah :  (7)  that  he  might  show  to  the  coming 
a^b  the  magnitude  of  the  riches  of  his  grace,  and 
his  benignity  towards  us  in  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

8  (8)  For  it  is  by  his  grace  we  are  rescued,  through 
faith ;  and  this  is  not  of  yourselves,  but  it  is  the 

9  gift  of  God :  (9)  not  of  works,  lest  any  one  glory. 

10  (10)  For  we  are  his  creation ;«  who  are  created  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  for  good  works,  which  God  hath 
before  prepared  for  us  to  walk  in. 

11  Wherefore  be  mindful,  that  ye  formerly .  were 
carnal  Gentiles ;  and  ye  were  called  the  uncircum* 
dsion,  by  that  which  is  called  the  circumcision, 
and  which  is  the  work  of  the  hands  in  the  flesh. 

12  (12)  And  ye  were,  at  that  time,  without  the  Mes- 
siah ;  and  were  aliens  from  the  regulations^^  of  Is 
rael ;  and  strangers  to  the  covenant  of  the  promise ; 
and  were  without  hope,  and  without  God,  in  the 

18  world.  (13)  But  now,  by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  ye  who 
before  were  afar  ofl^  have  been  brought  near  by  the 

14  blood  of  the  Messiah.  (14)  For  he  is  himself  our 
peace,®  who  hath  made  the  two  [become]  one,  and 
hatii  demolished  the  wall  which  stood  in  the  midst, 

15  and  the  enmity,  by  his  flesh;  (15)  and  by  his 
prescriptions  he  hath  abolished  the  law  of  ordi- 
nances; that,  in  himself,  he  might  make  the  two  to 

16  be  one  new  man ;  and  he  hath  made  peace,  (16) 
and  hath  reconciled^  both  with  God,  infir  one  body, 

17  and  hath  slain  the  enmity  by  his  cross.  (17)  And 
he  came,  and  proclaimed  peace  to  you  afar  of^  and 

18  to  those  near :  (18)  because,  by  him  there  is  access 

19  for  us  both,  by  one  Spirit,  unto  the  Father. — (19) 
Wherefore,  ye  are  not  strangers,  nor  sojourners, 
but  ye  are  fellow-citizens  with  the  saints,  and  of  the 

20  household  of  God.  (20)  And  ye  are  built  upon  the 
foundations  of  the  legates  and  the  prophets ;  and 
Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  become  the  head  of  the 

21  comer  in  the  edifice.  (21)  And  in  him  all  the 
edifice  is  fi*amed  together,  and  groweth  into  a  holy 

22  temple  in  the  Lord ;  (22)  while  ye  also  are  builded 
in  him,  for  a  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit 

HL     On  this  account,  I  Paul  am  a  prisoner  of  Jesus 
2  the  Messiah,  for  the  sake  of  you  GFentiles :  (2)  if  so 


Sy. 


sy  ]o;v^ 


Sy.]AA^ 


-  Sy  V^f^OJ 


or, 
maker. 


Sy. 


or,  by. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


354 


EPHESIANS,   III. 


•  Sy.  sons, 
cSy.U 


d  Qj.fuU  of 
diversities, 

*  or,  prefkired. 


'  L  e.  faith  in 
him. 


« Sy.12oai£)l 


'  or,  power 
above  all. 


be,  ye  have  heard  of  the  dispensation  of  the  grace 
of  God,  which  was  given  to  me  among  you :  (8)  that    3 
by  revelation  there  was  made  known  to  me  the 
mystery,  (as  I  have  [now]  written  to  you  in  brie^ 
(4)  so  that  while  ye  read,  ye  might  be  able  to  un-     4 
aerstand  my  knowledge  of  the  mystery  of  the  Mes- 
siah,)— (5)   which  in  other  generations  was   not    5 
made  known  to  the  sons  of  men,  as  it  is  now  re- 
vealed to  his  holy  legates  and  to  his  prophets,  by 
the  Spirit ;  (6)  that  the  Gentiles  should  be  sharers*     6 
of  his  inheritance,  and  partakers  of  his  body,  and 
of  the  promise  which  is  given  in  him  by  the  gos-     7 
pel;*»  (7)  of  which  I  have  been  a  minister,  accord- 
mg  to  the  gift  of  the  goodness  of  God,  which  was 
imparted  to  me  by  the  operation  of  his  power:® — 
(8)  to  me,  who  am  the  least  of  all  the  saints,  hath    8 
this  grace  been   given,  that  I  should  announce 
among  the  Gentiles  the  unsearchable  riches  of  the 
Messiah,  (9)  and  should  show  to  all  men  what  is     9 
the  dispensation  of  the  mystery,  which  for  ages  was 
hid  up  in  God  the  Creator  of  all  [things] :  (10)  so  10 
that,  by  means  of  the  church,  the  manifold^^  wisdom 
of  Goa  might  become  known  to  the  principalities 
and  powers  that  are  in  heaven:  (11)  which  [wis-  11 
domj  he  arranged®  ages  before,  and  he  hath  execu- 
ted it  by  Jesus  the  Messiah  our  Lord ;  (12)  through  12 
whom  we  have  boldness  and  access,  in  the  confi- 
dence of  his  faith/    (13)  Therefore  I  pray,  that  I  13 
may  not  be  discouraged  by  my  afflictions,  which 
are  for  your  sakes ;  for  this  is  your  glory.     (14)  And  14 
I  bow  my  knees  to  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  (15)  from  whom  the  whole  familyfif  in  15 
heaven  and  on  earth  is  named;  (16)  that  he  would  16 
grant  you,  according  to  the  riches  of  his  glory,  to 
be  strengthened  with  might  by  his  Spirit ;  that  in 
your  inner  man  (17)  the  Messiah  may  dwell  by  17 
faith,  and  in  your  hearts  by  love,  while  your  root 
and  your  foundation  waxeth  strong ;  (18)  and  that  18 
je  may  be  able  to  explore,  with  all  the  saints,  what 
IS  the  height  and  depth,  and  length  and  breadth, 
(19)  and  may  know  the  greatness  of  the  Messiah's  19 
love ;  and  [that]  ye  may  be  filled  with,  all  the  fulk 
Jjjess  ofGod. — (20)  Now  to  him  who  is  able,  by  his  20 
almighty  power,  ^  to  do  for  us  even  more  than  we 
ask  or  think,  according  to  his  power  that  worketh 
in  us ;  (21)  to  him  be  glory,  in  his  church,  by  Je-  21 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EPHESIANS,   IV. 


355 


SUB  the  Messiah,  in  all  generations,  for  ever  and 
ever.    Amen. 

IV.  I  therefore,  a  prisoner  in  our  Lord,  beseech  of 
you,  that  ye  walk,  (as  it  becometh  the  calling  where- 

2  with  ye  are  called,)  (2)  with  all  lowliness  of  mind, 
and  quietness,  and  long  suflfering ;  and  that  ye  be 

S  forbearing  one  towards  another,  in  love-    (8)  And 

be  ye  solicitous  to  keep  the  unity^  of  the  Spirit,  in  •  S7.  )Za«ol 

4  a  Dond  of  peace ;  (4)  so  that  ye  may  become  one 
body,  and  one  Spirit ;  even  as  ye  are  called  unto  one 

5  hope  of  your  calling.     (5)  For,  the  Lord  is  one,  and 

6  the  faith  one,  and  the  baptism  one ;  (6)  and  one  God 
is  the  Father  of  all,  and  over  all,  and  by  all,  and  in 

7  •  us  all.— (7)  And  to  each  of  us  grace  is  given,  ac- 

cording to  the  measure  of  the  gift  of  the  Messiah. 

8  (8)  Wherefore  it  is  said :  He  ascended  on  high,  and 
carried  captivity  captive,  and  gave  gifts  to  men. 

9  (9)  Now  that  he  ascended,  what  is  it  but  that  he 
also  previously  descended  to  the  inferior  [regions] 

10  of  the  earth  ?  (10)  He  who  descended,  is  also  the 
same  that  ascended  up,  high  above  all  the  heavens,  ^  Sy.^oXAJi 

11  that  he  might  fulfill^  all  things.     (11)  And  he  gave 
some,  legates ;    and   some,   prophets ;  and  some,  *  ®y- 
evangelists  ;c  and  some,   pastors^   and  teachers  :^  ^  ]jjiiinlo 

12  (12)  for  perfecting  the  samts,  for  the  work  of  the  ^  «    n; 
ministry,  for  the  edification  of  the  body  of  the  Mes^    ^'  J^^^' 

18  siah ;  (13)  until  we  all  become  one  and  the  same/  ,  gy  ]V<7^\vn 
in  faith  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Son  of  Gkxi,        * 
and  nme  complete  man  according  to  the  measure  of  f  Sy.^jlo  ^, 

14  the  stature  of  the  fullness  of  Messiah :  (14)  and  that 
we  might  not  be  children,  a^tated  and  turned 
about  by  every  wind  of  the  cra^  doctrines  of  men 

15  who  plot  to  seduce  by  their  subtilty :  (15)  but  that 
we  might  be  established  in  our  love;  and  that 
every  thing  in  us  might  progress  in  the  Messiah, 

16  who  is  the  head:  (16)  and  from  him  [it  is],  the 
whole  body  is  framed  together  and  compacted  by 
all  the  junctures,  according  to  the  gift  that  is  im- 
parted by  measure  to  each  member,  for  the  growth 
of  the  body ; — that  his  edifice  may  be  perfected  in 
love. 

17  And  this  I  say.  and  testify  in  the  Lord,  that 
henceforth  ye  walk  not  as  the  other  Gentiles,  who 

18  walk  in  the  vanity  of  their  mind :  (18)  and  they 
are  dark  in  their  understandings,  and  are  alienated 


Digitized  by 


Google 


356 


EPHESIANS,  V. 


undentandings. 


-  (ir.  to  the 
Devil 


87.  wordt 
speech 


•Sy.il. 

^  Sy.  ^  naiTieJ 


from  the  life  of  Gbd,  because  there  is  not  in  them 
knowledge,  and  because  of  the  blindness  of  their 
heart     (19)  They  have  cut  off  their  hope,  and  19 
have  given  themselves  over  to  lasciviousness,  and 
to  the  practice  of  all  uncleanness  in  their  greediness. 
f20^  But  ye  have  not  so  learned  the  Messiah;  20 
(21)  if  ye  have  truly  heard  him,  and  by  him  have  21 
learned  as  the  truth  is  in  Jesus.    (22)  But  [ye  have  22 
learned],  that  ye  should  lay  aside  your  former  prac- 
tices, the  old  man  that  is  corrupted  with  the  lusts 
of  error ;  (28)  and  should  be  renewed  in  the  spirit  28 
of  your  minds  ;ff  (24)  and  should  put  on  the  new  24 
man,  that  is  created  by  G-od  in  righteousness  and 
in  the  holiness  of  truth. — (25)  Wherefore,  put  away  25 
from  you  lying,  and  speak  ye  the  truth  each  with 
his  neighbor ;  for  we  are  members  one  of  another. 
— (26)  Be  ye  angry,  and  sin  not :  and  let  not  the  26 
sun  go  down  upon  your  wrath.    (27)  And  give  no  27 
place   to   the  Accuser.**— (28)  Aiid  let  him  that  28 
stole,  steal  no  more;  but  let  him  labor  with  his 
hands,  and  do  good  acts ;    that  he  may  have  to 
give  to  him  who  needeth.— (29)  Let  no  hateful  Ian-  29 
guage*  come  from  your  moutn,  but  that  which  is 
decorous,  and  useful  for  edification,  that  it  may 
convey  grace  to  those  who  hear.     (80)  And  grieve  80 
not  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  whereby  ye  are  sealed 
for  the  day  of  redemption.— (81)  Let  all  bitterness,  81 
and  anger,  and  wrath,  and  clamoring,  and  reviling, 
be  taken  from  you,  with  all  malice :  (82)  and  be  82 
ye  affectionate  towards  one  another,  ana  sympa- 
thetic ;  and  forgive  ye  one  another,  as  God  by  the 
Messiah  hath  forgiven  us.    (V.)  Be  ye  therefore  V. 
imitators  of  God,  as  dear  children :  (2)  and  walk  in    2 
love ;  as  the  Messiah  also  hath  loved  us,  and  hath 
given  up  himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice 
to  God,  for  a  sweet  odor. 

But  whoredom,  and  all  impurity,  and  avarice,     8 
let  thema  not  be  at  all  heard  of  *>  among  you,  as 
it  becometh  the  saints ;  (4)  Neither  obscenities,  nor    4 
words  of  folly,  or  of  division,  or  of  scurrility,  which 
are  not  useful ;  but  instead  of  these,  thanl^giving. 
(5^  For  this  know  ye,  that  every  man  who  is  a    5 
wAoremonger,  or  impure,  or  avaricious,  or  a  wor- 
shipper of  idols,  hath  no  inheritance  in  the  king- 
dom of  the  Messiah  and  of  God.    (6)  Let  no  man     6 
deceive  you  with  vain  words;   for  it  is  on  account 


Digitized  by 


Google 


EPHESIANS,   V. 


357 


of  these  things  that  the  wrath  of  Gbd  cometh  on 

7  the  children  of  disobedience.     (7)  Therefore  be  ye 

8  not  like  them.    (8)  For  ye  were  heretofore  dark- 
ness, but  now  are  ye  light  in  our  Lord :  therefore, 

9  as  the  children  of  light,  so  walk  ye.     (9)  For  the 
fruits  of  the  light  are  m  all  goodness,  and  righteous- 

10  ness,  and  truth.    (10)   And  search  out  what  is 

11  pleasing  before  our  Lord:  (11 J  And  have  no  com- 
merce -with  the  works  of   darkness  which    are 

12  unfruitful,  but  reprove  them.  (12)  For  the  things 
they  do  in  secret^  it  is  nauseous  even  to  mention. 
(18)  For  all  things  are  exposed  and  made  manifest 
by  the  light :  and  whatever  maJ^eth  manifest,®  is 
light.  (14)  Wherefore  it  is  said :  Awake  thou  that 
sleepest,  and  arise  from  the  dead,  and  the  Messiah 
will  illuminate  thee.     (15)  See  therefore,  that  ye 

16  walk  circumspectly ;  not  like  the  simple,  (16)  but 
like  the  wise,  who  purchase  their  opportunity; 

17  because  the  days  are  evil.  (17)  Therefore,  be  not 
lacking  in  understanding ;  but  understand  ye  what 
is  the  pleasure  of  God.  (18)  And  be  not  drunk 
with  wme,  in  which  is  dissoluteness;*  but  be  ye 
filled  with  the  spirit  (19^  And  converse  with 
yourselves®  in  psalms  and  nymns;  and  with  your 
hearts  sing  to  the  Lord,  in  spiritual  songs.  (20) 
And  give  thanks  to  God  the  Father,  at  all  times, 
for  all  men,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah.  (21)  And  be  submissive  one  to  another, 
in  the  love  of  the  Messiah. 

Wives,  be  ye  submissive  to  your  husbands,  as  to 
our  Lord.  (23)  Because  the  husband  is  the  head 
of  the  wife,  even  as  the  Messiah  is  the  head  of  the 

24  church ;  and  he  is  the  vivifier^  of  the  body.  (24) 
And  as  the  church  is  subject  to  the  Messiah,  so 
also  let  wives  be  to  their  husbands  in  all  things. 

25  (25)  Husbands,  love  your  wives,  even  as  the  Mes- 
siah loved  his  church,  and  delivered  himself  up  for 

26  it ;  (26)  that  he  might  sanctify  it,  and  cleanse  it, 

27  by  tne  washing  of  water,  and  by  the  word ;  (27) 
and  might  constitute  it  a  glorious  church  for  him 
sel^  in  which  is  no  stain,  and  no  wrinkle,  and 
nothing  like  them ;  but  that  it  might  be  holy  and 
without  blemish.  (28)  It  behooveth  men  so  to  love 
their  wives,  as  [they  do]  their  own  bodies.    For  he 

29  that  loveth  his  wife  loveth  himself.  (29)  For  no 
one  ever  hated  his  own  body ;  but  nounsheth  it 


18 
14 


15 


18 
19 
20 


21 

22 
28 


28 


Sy .uneovereA 


'Sy. 

Gr.  d/idyrlaL, 
•  or,  your  souk 


'  or,  Samour 


Digitized  by 


Google 


358 


EPHESIANS,   VI. 


SylllJ 


'  Sy.  ]j]d 


lards. 


"^  Or.  the  DeoiL 
-Sy. 


•  Sy.  shoe  your 
JteL 

'  Sy.  Ijjqcd 


8 


and  provideth  for  it^  even  as  the  Messiah  the 
churcn.    (80)  For  we  are  members  of  his  body,  80 
and  of  his  flesh,  and  of  his  bones.     (81)  For  tms  81 
reason,  a  man  should  quit  his  father  and  his  mo- 
ther, and  adhere  to  his  wife ;  and  the  two  should 
be  one  flesh.    (82)  This  is  a  great  mystery ;«  but  I  82 
am  speaking  of  the  Messiah,  and  of  his  church. 
(88)  iTevertheless,  let  each  of  you  severally  so  love  88 
his  wife,  even  as  himself:   and  let  the  wife  rev- 
erence her  husband. — (VI.')  Children,  obey  your  VI. 
parents  in  our  Lord ;   for  tnis  is  right.*     {2)  And    2 
the    first  commandment  with  promise,   is    this: 
Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother ;  (8)  that  it  may 
be  well  with  thee,  and  that  thy  life  may  be  pro- 
longed on  the  earth. — (4)    And  parents,  anger  not 
your  children ;  but  train  them  up  in  the  discipline 
and  doctrine  of  our  Lord. — (5)  Servants,  be  obe- 
dient to  your  masters  after  the  flesh,  with  fear,  and 
with  trepidation,  and  with  simplicity  of  heart,  as 
unto  the  Messiah.     (6)  Not  in  the  sight  of  the  eye, 
as  if  ye  were  pleasing  men ;  but  as  the  servants  of 
the  Messiah,  who  are  doing  the  will  of  God.    (7) 
And  serve  them  with  your  whole  heart,  in  love,  as 
if  serving  our  Lord  and  not  men ;  (8)  knowing  that 
whatever  good  thing  a  man  may  do,  the  same  will 
be  recompensed  to  him  by  our  Lord,  whether  he  be 
a  servant  or  a  free  man.— (9)  Also  ye  masters,**  do 
ye  so  to  your  servants.     Forgive  them  a  feult; 
Decause  ye  know,  that  ye  have  a  master  in  heaven ; 
and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons  with  him. 

Finally,  my  bretnren,  be  strong  in  our  Lord,  and  10 
in  the  energy  of  his  power:    (11)  And  put  ye  on  11 
the  whole  armor  of  God,  so  that  ye  may  be  able  to 
stand  against  the  wiles  of  the  Accuser.®    (12)  For 
our  conflict  is  not  with  flesh  and  blood,  but  with 
principalities,^  and  with  those  in   authority,  and 
with  tne  possessors  of  this  dark  world,  and  with  the 
evil  spirits  that  are  beneath  heaven.     (18)  There- 
fore put  ye  on  the  whole  armor  of  God,  that  ye  may 
be  able  to  meet  the  evil  [one]  ;  and,  being  in  all 
respects  prepared,  may  stand  firm.    (14)  Stand  up  14 
therefore,  and  gird  your  loins  with  truth  ;  and  put 
on  the  breastplate'  of  righteousness;    (15)    and  15 
defend®  your  feet  with  the  preparation  of  the  gos- 
pel of  peace.     (16)  And  herewith  take  to  you  the  16 
confidence^  of  faith,  by  which  ye  ^»il!  aavt?  powei 


6 


8 


9 


12 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PHILIPPIANS,    I. 


359 


17  to  qnench  all  the  fiery  darts  of  the  evil  [one].  (17) 
And  put  on  the  helmet  of  rescue  ;ff  and  take  hold 
of  the  sword  of  the  Spirit,  which  is  the  word  of 

is  Gtod.  (18)  And  pray  ye,  with  all  prayers  and 
supplications,  in  spirit,  at  all  times :  and  in  prayer 
be  watchful,  at  all  seasons,  praying  constantly,  and 

19  interceding  for  all  the  saints :  (19)  and  ako  for 
me;  that  language**  may  be  given  me,  in  the 
opening  of  my  mouth ;  so  that  I  may  boldlv  pro- 

20  claim  the  mystery  of  the  gospel,  (20)  of  which  I 
am  a  messenger  in  chains ;  that  I  may  utter  it 
boldly,  as  I  ought  to  utter  it. 

21  And  that  ye  also  may  know  my  affairs,  and  what 
I  am  doing,  Jo,  Tychicus,  a  beloved  brother,  and  a 
faithful  minister  in  our  Lord,  will  acquaint  you ; 

22  (22)  whom  I  have  sent  to  you  for  this  purpose, 
that  ye  might  know  what  is  [going  on]  with  me, 
and  that  your  hearts  may  be  comforted. 

23  Peace  be  with  the  brethren,  and  love  with  faith, 
firom  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the 

24  Messiah. — (24)  Grace  be  with  all  them  who  love 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  without  corruptuess. 
Amen. 

End  cf  the  EpUtle  to  the  Ephetians ;   which  was  wriUen  frrnn 
Ramef  and  was  sent  by  the  land  of  Tychicus. 


»  Sy. 
Gr.  (fciinipitiu 


^  Sy.  wordy 
discourse. 


The  Epistle  of  Paal  to  the  Philippians. 


I,  Paul  and  Timothy,  servants  of  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah, to  all  the  saints  that  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah 

2  at  Philippi,  with  the  elders^  and  deacons.**  (2) 
Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace  from  God  our  Father, 
and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

3  I  thank  my  God  at  the  constant  recollection  of 

4  you,  (4)  in  all  my  prayers  respecting  you;  and 
while  I  rejoice,  I  adore ;  (5)  on  account  of  your 

5  fellowship  in  the  gospel,  from  the  first  day  until 


Sy.V. 


.^JS 


»'Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


360 


PHILIPPIANS,   I. 


^^' 


'  By.  are  manu 
fetUd. 


^  OTffif  Itfe  to 
mi. 


now.    (6)  Because  I  am  confident  of  this,  that  he    6 
who  hath  begun  the  good  works  in  jou,  will  ao- 
oomplish  them  until  the  day  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah.    (7J  E^r  thus  it  is  right  for  me  to  think    ** 
of  you  all,  D^use  ye  are   permaneQtly  in  my 
heart,  and  because,  both  in  my  bonds  and  in  the 
vindication  of  the  truth  of  the  gospel,  ye  are  my 
associates  in  grace.     (8)  For  God  is  my  witness,    8 
how  I  love  you  in  the  bowels  of  Jesus  the*  Messiah. 
—(9)  And  this  I  pray  for,  that  your  love  may  still    9 
increase  and  abound,  in  knowledge,  and  in  all 
spiritual  understanding:  (10)  so  that  ye  may  dis-  10 
cem  the  things  that  are  suitaole ;  and  may  be  pure 
and  without  offence,  ^  the  day  of  the  Messiah,  (11)  11 
and  be  full  of  the  fruits  of  righteousness  which  are 
by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  to  the  praise  and  glory  of 
Gfod. 

And  I  would  that  ye  might  know,  my  brethren,  12 
that  the  transaction  in  regard  to  me,  hath  eventu- 
ated rather   for  the  furtnerance  of  the  gospel;  18 
so  that  my  bonds,  on  account  of  the  Messiah,  are 
matter  of  notoriety*^  in  all  the  court,  and  to  all  others. 

(14)  And  many  of  the  brethren  in  our  Lord  have  14 
become  confident,  on  account  of  my  bonds,  and  are 
more  bold-to  speak  the  word  of  God  without  fear. — 

(15)  And  they  herald  [it],  some  from  envy  and  con-  15 
tention ;  but  others  with  good  will,  and  with  love 
for  the  Messiah ;  (16)  because  they  know  that  I  am  16 
appointed  for  the  vindication  of  the  gospeL    (17)  17 
And  they  who  herald  the  Messiah  in  contention, 

do  it  not  sincerely;  but  they  hope  to  add  pressure 
to  my  bonds.   (18)  And  in  this  I  have  rejoiced,  and  18 
do  rejoice,  that  in  every  form,  whether  tn-^tetence/M' 
or  in  truth,  the  Messiah  is  heralded.     (19)  For  I  li 
know,  that  these  things  will  be  found  [conducive] 
to  my  life,^  through  your  pniyers  and  the  gift  of 
the  Spirit  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (20)  So  that  I  20 
hope  and  expect,  that  I  shall  in  nothing  be  put  to 
shame;  but  with  uncovered  face,  as  at  all  times, 
so  now,  the   Messiah   will   be  magnified  in  my 
body,  whether  by  life  or  by  death.-y-(21)  For  my  21 
life  is,  the  Messiah ;  and  if  I  die,  it  is  gain  to  me. 
(22)   But  if  I  have  fruits  of  my  labors  in  this  life  22 
of  the   flesh,   I  know  not  what  I  shall  choose. 
(28)  For  the  two  press  upon  me:  I  desire  to  be  28 
liberated,  that  I  may  be  with  the  Messiah ;  and  this 


{^^' 


"  ( 


^t/^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PHILIPPIANS.   IL 


361 


jvf 


24  would  be  very  advantageous  to  me.  (24)  But  also 
the  business  in  regard  to  you,  urges  upon  me  to 

26  remain  in  the  body. — {25)  And  this  I  confidently 
know,  that  I  shall  continue  and  remain,  for  your  joy, 

26  and  for  the  furtherance  of  your  faith ;  (26)  so  that 
when  I  come  again  to  you,  your  glorying,  which  is 
in  Jesus  the  Messiah  only,  will  abound  tmlough  me. 

27  Let  your  conduct  be  as  becometh  the  gospel  of 
the  Messiah ;  so  that  if  I  come  I  may  see  you,  and 
if  absent  I  may  hear  of  you,  that  ye  stand  fast  in  one 
spirit  and  in  one  soul,«  and  that  ye  strive  together 

28  ^  the  fiuth  of  the  gospel.    (28)  And  in  nothmg  be 

yfe  startled,  by  those  who  rise  up  against  us ;  [which 
is]  an  indication  of  their  destruction,  and  of  life^ 

29  for  you.  (29)  And  this  is  given  to  you  by  God, 
that  ye  not  only  really  believes  in  the  Messiah,  but 

80  also  that  ye  suffer  on  his  account ;  (80)  and  that  ye 

endure  conflict,  as  ye  have  seen  in  me,  and  now  hear 

IL  concemiuff  me. — {[L)  J£,  therefore,  ye  have  conso- 

lation  in  the  Messiah,  or  if  a  commingling^  of  hearts 

in  love,  or  if  a  fellowship  of  the  Spirit,  or  if  com- 

2  passions  and  sympathies ;  (2)  complete  ye  my  joy, 
by  having  one  apprehension,  and  one  love,  and  one 

8  soul,  and  one  mind.  (8)  And  do  nothing  in  strife, 
or  in  vain  glory ;  but,  with  lowliness  of  mind,  let 
each  esteem  his  neighbor  as  better  than  himself 

4  (4)  And  let  not  each  be  solicitous  [only]  for  him- 

6  sei^  but  every  one  also  for  his  neighbor.  (5)  And 
think  ye  so  in  yourselves,  as  Jesus  the  Messiah  also 

6  thought ;  (6)  who,  as  be  was  in  the  likeness  of  God, 
deemed  it  no  trespass*'^  to  be  the  coequal®  of  God ; 

7  (7^  yet  divested*  himself,  and  assumed  the  likeness 
oi  a  servant,  and  was  in  the  likeness  of  men,  and 

8  was  found  in  fashion  as  a  man ;  (8)  and  he  humbled 
himself,  and  became  obedient  unto  death,  even  the 

9  death  of  the  cross.  (9)  Wherefore,  also,  God  hath 
highly  exalted  him,  and  given  him  a  name  which 

10  is  more  excellent  than  all  names ;  (10)  that  at  the 
naime  of  Jesus  every  knee  should  bow,  of  (beings] 

11  in  heaven,  and  on  earth,  and  under  the  earth ;  (11) 
and  that  every  tongue  should  confess  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  is  the  Lord,®  to  the  glory  of  God  his 

12  Father. — (12)  Therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  have 
at  all  times  obeved,  not  only  when  I  was  near  to 
you,  but  now  when  I  am  far  from  you,  prosecute 
the  work  of  your  life,^  more  abundantly,*  with  fear 


Sy. 


or,  salvaikm, 

Sy. 

ye  believe. 


Sy.< 

wUh  thehemt 


or,  robbertf, 
Sy.  p^«^.^g^ 

or,  empftedL 


Sy.  ]a^ 

or,  saivaiUm. 
Sy;  A^l^A^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


362 


PHILIPPIANS,   III. 


or. 


^Wftahahon. 


^Sy.]>,iN> 


1  Sy. 


17 
18 
19 


20 
21 


and  with  trembling.    (18)  For  God  is  operating  in  13 
you,  both  to  purpose,  and  also  to  perform  that 
which  ye  desire.    (14^  Do  all  things  without  mur-  14 
muring,  and  without  altercation ;  (15]  that  ye  may  be  16 
perfect  and  without  blemish,  as  the  sincere^  children 
of  God,  who  are  resident  in  a  perverse  and  crooked 
generation ;  and  that  ye  may  appear  among  them 
as  luminaries  in  the  world;  (16)  so  that  ye  may  be  16 
to  them  in  place  of  life ;'  for  my  glory  in  the  day 
of  the  Messiah,  that  I  may  not  have  run  in  vain, 
or  toiled  for  naught — (17)  And  if  I  should  be 
made  a  libation  upon  the  sacrifice  and  service  of 
your  faith,  I  rejoice  and  exult  with  you  all.    (18) 
And  so  also  do  ye  rejoice  and  exult  with  me. 

But  I  hope  in  our  Lord  Jesus,  that  I  shall 
shortly  send  Timothy  unto  you,  so  that  I  also  may 
have  composure,  when  informed  concerning  you. 
(20]  For  I  have  no  other  one  here,  who,  like  my- 
self will  sincerely  care  for  your  welfare.    (21)  For 
they  all  seek  their  own,  not  the  [things]  of  Jesus 
the  Messiah.    (22)  But  ye  know  the  proof  of  him,  22 
that  as  a  son  with  his  father,  so  he  labored  with  me 
in  the  gospel.     (28)  Him  I  hope  shortly  to  send  to  28 
you,  when  I  shall  have  seen  how  [things  result] 
with  me.    (24)  And  I  trust  in  my  Lord,  that  I  24 
shall  shortly  come  myself  to  you.— (25)  But  now,  25 
a  circumstance  urged  me  to  send  to  you  Epaphro- 
ditus,  the  brother  who  is  an  assistant  and  laoorer 
with  me,  but  is  your  legate*^  and  minister*  to  my 
wants.    (26)  For  he  longed  to  see  you  all,  and  was  26 
anxious,  because  he  knew  ye  had  heard,  that'  he 
was  sick.    (27)  And  indeed  he  was  sick,  nigh  unto  27 
death :  but  God  had  mercy  on  him :  nor  was  it  on 
him  only,  but  also  on  me,  that  I  might  not  have 
trouble  upon  trouble.     (28)  Promptly,  therefore,  28 
have  I  sent  him  to  you ;  so  that  when  ye  see  him, 
ye  may  again  be  joyful,  and  I  may  have  a  little 
breathing.     (29)  Eeceive  him   then  in  the  Lord, 
with  all  joy ;    and  hold  in  honor  those  who  are 
such.    (80)  For,  because  of  the  Messiah's  work,  he 
came  near  to  death,  and  little  regarded  his  life,  that 
he  might  fulfill  what  you  lacked  in  the  ministration 
to  me. 


29 
80 


Finally,  my  brethren,  rejoice  in  our  Lord.    To  III 
write  these  [things]  again  and  again  to  you,  is  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


PHILIPPIANS,    III. 


363 


irksome  to  me,  becaiise  they  make  you  cautious. 

2  (2)  Beware  of  dogs;  beware  of  evil  doers;  beware 

3  or  the  clipped  in  flesh.  (8)  For  we  are  the  [real] 
circumcision,  who  worship  God  in  spirit,  and  glory 
in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  ana  place  no  reliance  on  the 

4  flesh.  (4)  And  yet  I  might  place  reliance  on  the 
flesh.  For,  if  any  one  thinketh  that  his  reliance 
should  be  on  the  flesh,  I  might  [do  so]  more  than 

6  he.  (5)  Circumcised  when  eight  days  old ;  of  the 
stock  of  Israel ;  of  the  tribe  of  Benjamin ;  a  He- 
brew, descendant  of  Hebrews ;   as  to  the  law,  a 

6  Pharisee ;  ^6)  as  to  zeal,  a  persecutor  of  the  church ; 
and  as  to  the  righteousness*  of  the  law,  I  was  with- 

7  out  fault  (7)  But  these  things,  which  had  been 
my  excellence,  I  have  accounted  a  detriment,  be- 

8  cause  of  the  Messiah.  (8)  And  now  also  I  account 
them  all  a  detriment,  because  of  the  excellency  of 
the  knowledge  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  my  Lord ;  for 
the  sake  of  whom,  I  have  parted  with  all  things, 
and  have  accounted  [them]  as  dtrng,  that  I  might 

9  gain  the  Messiah,  (9)  and  be  found  in  him ;  since 
my  righteousness  is  not  [^now]  that  from  the  law, 
but  that  which  is  from  faith  in  the  Messiah,  that  is, 

10  the  righteousness**  which  is  from  God;  (10)  that 
thereby  I  might  know  Jesus,  and  the  efficacy^^  of 
his  resurrection ;  and  might  participate  in  his  suf- 

11  ferings,  and  be  assimilated  to  his  death :  (11)  if  so 
be,  I  may  attain  to  the  resurrection  from  the  dead. 

12  (12)  Not  as  though  I  had  already  taken  [the  prize], 
or  were  already  complete ;  but  I  run  [in  the  race" , 
if  so  I  may  take  that,  for  which  Jesus  the  Messiah 

18  took  me.  (13)  My  brethren,  I  do  not  consider 
myself  as  having  taken  [it].  But  one  thing  I 
know,  that  I  forget.the  things  behind  me,  and  reach 

14  for  the  things  before  me ;  (14)  and  I  run  straight 
for  the  goal,^  that  I  may  obtain  the  [prize]  of  vic- 
tory of  the  call  of  God  firom  on  high,  by  Jesus  the 

15  Messiah.  (15)  Therefore  let  those  who  are  perfect, 
have  these  views ;  and  if  ye  diflferentlv  view  any 

16  thing,  Gbd  will  reveal  that  also  to  you.  (l6)  Never- 
theless, that  we  may  attain  to  this,  let  us  proceed  on 

17  in  one  path,  and  with  one  consent. — (17)  Be  like  me, 
my  brethren;    and  contemplate  them,  who  walk 

18  after  the  pattern  ye  have  seen  in  us.  (18)  For  there 
are  many  who  walk  otherwise ;  of  whom  I  have 
often  told  you,  and  I  now  tell  you,  with  weeping, 


Digitized  by 


Sy.'j/oni? 


^'Sy.lZoQ^J 


'  or,  standard. 


Google 


364 


PHILIPPIANS,   IV. 


or,  iSarnour. 


^  or,  mUdnesSf 
tweelneis  of 

iiiponiian. 


^  or,  trained, 
diteipUned. 


that  they  are  adversaries  of  the  cross  of  the  Messiah; 
(19J  whose  end  is  destruction;  whose  god  is  their  19 
belly,  and  their  glory  their  shame ;  whose  thoughts 
are  on  things  of  the  earth.    (20)  But  our  concern  is  20 
with  hearen ;  and  from  thence  we  expect  our  Vivi- 
fier,«  our  Lord,  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (21)  who  will  21 
change  the  body  of  our  abasement,  that  it  may  have 
the  luceness  of  the  body  of  his  glory,  according  to 
his  great  power,  whereby  all  things  are  made  sub- 
ject to  him.--(IV.)  Wherefore,  my  beloved  and  TV. 
dear  brethren,  my  joy  and  my  crown ! — so  stand 
ye  fast  in  our  Lord,  my  beloved  I 

I  beseech  of  Euodias  and  Syntyche,  that  they  be    2 
of  one  mind  in  our  Lord.    (8)  I  also  beseech  of     3 
thee,  my  true  yokefellow,  that  thou  assist  those 
women  who  toiled  with  me  in  the  gospel ;  together 
with  Clement,  and  with  the  rest  of  mv  helpers, 
whose  names  are  written  in  the  book  of  life.— (4J    4 
Bejoice  ye  in  our  Lord,  at  all  times ;  and  again  I 
say,  Bejoice.    (5)  Let  your  humility*  be  recognized    5 
among    all    men.     Our  Lord    is    near.     (6)  Be    6 
anxious  for  nothing;  but  at  all  times,  byjprayer 
and  supplication  with  thanksgiving,  make  known 
your  requests  before  GtoA.    (7)  And  the  peace  of     7 
God,  which  surpasseth  all  knowledge,  will  keep 

Jour  hearts  ana  your  minds,  through  Jesus  the 
[essiah.— (8)  Finallv,  my  brethren,  what  things  8 
are  true,  and  what  things  are  decorous,  and  what 
things  are  right,  and  what  things  are  pure,  and 
what  things  are  lovely,  and  what  things  are  com- 
mendable, and  deeds  of  praise  and  approbation, — 
on  these  be  your  thoughts.  (9)  Wnat  things  je  9 
have  lesirned,  and  received,  and  heard,  and  seen,  in 
me, — these  do  ye :  and  the  God  of  peace  will  be 
with  you. 

And  I  rejoice  greatly  in  our  Lord,  that  ye  have  10 
[again]  commenced  caring  for  me ;  even  as  ye  had 
before  cared  [for  me,]  but  ye  had  not  the  opportu- 
nity.    (11)  1  et  I  say  this,  not  because  I  was  in  11 
want ;   for  I  have  learned  to  make  that  satisfy  me, 
which  I  have.     (12)  I  know  how  to  be  depressed,  12 
and  I  also  know  how  to  abound  in  every  thing ; 
and  in  all  things  am  I  exercised.  *»  both  in  fullness 
and  in  famine,  in  abundance  ana  in  penury.    (18)  18 
I  find  strength  for  every  thing,  in  the  Messiah  who 
strengtheneth  me.    (14)  Yet  ye  have  done  well,  in  14 


Digitized  by 


Google 


COLOSSIANS,   I. 


366 


16  that  ye  communicated  to  my  necessities.^ — (15) 
And  ye  know  also,  Philippiaus,  that  in  the  begin* 
ning  of  the  annunciation,  when  I  left  Macedonia, 
not  one  of  the  churches  communicated  with  me  in 
respect  to  receiviM  and  giving,  except^er^nly ; 

16  (16)  that  also  at  Thessalonica,  once  andagain  ye 

17  sent  me  relief     (17)  Not  that  I  desire  a  g3k ;  but 

18  I  wish  fruits  may  multiply  unto  you.  (18)  I  have 
[now]  received  all,  ana  I  abound,  and  am  ftdl : 

•  and  I  accepted  all  that  ye  sent  to  me  by  Epaphro- 
ditus,  a  sweet  odor,  and  an  acceptable  sacrince  that 

19  pleaseth  God. — (19)  And  maj  (Sod  supply  all  your 
necessity,^  according  to  his  nches,  in  the  glory  of 

20  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (20)  And  to  God  our  Father, 
be  glory  and  honor,  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

21  Salute  all  the  saints  who  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

22  The  brethren  who  are  with  me,  salute  you.  (22) 
All  the  saints  salute  you,  especially  those  of  CsesjEo^s 

28  household. — (23)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  be  with  you  all.    Amen. 

End  cf  iJie  Epistle  to  the  PhUwjnaru  ;  which  was  wriUen 
from  Rome^  and  sent  by  the  hand  cf  Epaphroditus. 


or,  1 
tnd'ig^noC' 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Colossians. 


I.  Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  plea- 
2  sure  of  God,  and  Timothy  a  brother,  (2)  to  them 
who  are  at  Colosse,  the  brethren,  holy  and  believ- 
ing in  Jesus  the  Messiah :  peace  be  with  you,  and 
grace  from  God  our  Father. 
8  We  give  thanks  to  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  at  all  times,  and  pray  for  you ; 

4  (4)  lo,  ever  since  we  heard  of  your  faith  in  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  and  of  your  love  to  all  the  saints; 

5  (5)  because  of  the  hope  that  is  laid  up  for  you  in 
heaven,  of  which  ye  heard  before  in  the  word  of 

6  truth  of  the  gospel;    (6)  which  is  announced  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


366 


COLOSSIANS,   I. 


»Ry  ]v/%\v 


^  or,  tupplicate. 


you,  as  also  to  all  the  world  ;*  and  which  groweth 
and  yieldeth  fruits,  as  it  doth  also  among  you  from 
the  day  ye  heard  and  knew  the  grace  oi  Qod  in 
reality :  (7)  as  ye  learned  from  Epaphras,  our  be-     7 
loved  fellow-servant^   who  is  for  you  a  faithful 
minister  of  the  Messiah ;  (8Y  and  who  hath  made    8 
known  to  us  your  love  in  tne  Spirit — (9)  There-     9 
fore  we  also,  from  the  day  we  heard  [of  it],  have 
not  ceased  to  pray  for  you ;  and  to  ask**  that  ye 
may  be  filled  with  a  knowledge  of  the  good  pleas- 
ure of  God,  in  all  wisdom,  and  in  tdl  spiritual 
understanding ;  (10)  that  ye  may  walk  as  is  right,®  10 
and  may  please  Goa  with  all  good  works,  and  may 
yield  fruits,  and  grow  in  the  knowledge  of  God ; 
(11)  and  may  be  strengthened  with  all  strength,  11 
according  to  the  greatness  of  his  glory,  in  all 
patience  and  long  suffering;  (12)  and  may,  with  12 
3^7 1  &^^  thanks  to  God  the  Father,  who  hath 
fitted  us  for  a  portion  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light ;  (18)  and  hath  rescued  us  from  the  18 
dominion  of  darkness,  and  transferred  us  to  the 
kingdom  of  his  beloved  Son ;  (14)  by  whom  we  14 
have    redemption^    and  remission   of  sins: — (16)  15 
who  is  the  likeness^  of  the  invisible  God,  and  the 
first-born  of  all  creatures :    (16) .  and  by  him  was  16 
created  every  thing  that  is  in  heaven  and  on  earth, 
all  that  is  seen  and  all  that  is  unseen,  whether 
thrones,  or  dominions,  or  principalities,  or  sov- 
ereignties;   every  thing   was   through    him,  and 
was  created  by  him :     (17)    and    he   was  prior  17 

^  or,  siandeilh  is  to    all,  and    by    him    every   thing  exists.^    (18)18 
eaiablished.      And  he  is  the  head  of  the  body  the  church ;   as 
he  is  the  head  and  first-bom  from  among  the 

«  Sy.  ^^Vn^r>     dead,  that  he  might  be  the  firsts^  in  all  things. — 

(19)  For  it  pleased  [the  Father],  that  in  him  all  19 
fullness  should  dwell ;  (20)  and  by  him,  to  reconcile  20 
all  things  to  himself;  and  through  him,  he  hath 
pacified,  with  the  blood  of  his  cross,  both  [those] 
on  earth  and  those  in  heaven.     (21)  And  also  to  21 
you,  who  were  before   alienated  and  enemies  in 
your  minds,  because  of  your  evil  deeds, — (22)  to  22 
you,  he  hath  now  given  peace,  by  the  body  of  his 
flesh,  and  by  his  death ;  that  he  might  establish 
you  in  his  presence,  holy,  without  blemish,  and 
without  offence ;  (23)  provided  ye  continue  in  your  23 
&ith,  your  foundation  being  firm,  and  ye  be  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


COLOSSIANS,    11. 


367 


removed  from  the  hope  of  the  gospel;   of  which 
ye  have  heard,  that  it   is  proclaimed  in  all  the. 
creation^  beneath  heaven ;    of  which   [gospel]   I  ^  Sy.  ai\nn 
Paul  am  a  minister.  lA-»t^ 

24  And  I  rejoice  in  the  suflferings  which  are  for 
your  sakes ;  and,  in  my  flesh,  I  fill  up  the  defi- 
ciency in  the  affictions  of  the  Messiah,  in  behalf  of 

26  his  body,  which  is  the  church ;  (25)  of  which  I  am 
a  minister,  according  to  the  dispensation  of  God 
which  is  given  to  me  among  you,  that  I  should 

26  fulfill  the  word  of  God,  (26)  [namely,]  that  mystery, 
which  was  hidden  for  ages  and  generations,  but  is 

27  now  revealed  to  his  saints;  (27)  to  whom  Gtod 
would  make  known  what  is  the  riches  of  the  glory 
of  this  mystery  among  the  Gentiles ;  which  [mys- 
tery] is  the  Messiah ;  who  in  you  is  the  hope  of 

28  our  glory ;  (28)  whom  we  proclaim,  and  teach  and 
make  known  to  every  man,  in  all  wisdom;  that  we 
ffifiY  pr^nt  every  man  perfect  iix,  Jesus,.tKB"TSr^- 
siah.     (29)  And  for  this  also,  I  toil  and  strive,  with 

!elid  of  the  strength  that  is  imparted  to  me; 

EL  And  I  wish  you  to  know,  what  a  struggle*  I  have 
for  you,  and  for  them  of  Laodicea,  and  for  the 
others  who  have  not  seen  my  face  in  the  flesh; 

2  (2)  that  their  hearts  may  be  comforted,  and  that 
they,  by  love,  may  come  to  all  the  riches  of  assu- 
rance, and  to  the  understanding  of  the  knowledge 
of  the  mystery  of  God  the  Father,  and  of  the  Mes- 

8  siah,  (8)  in  whom  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of  wis- 

4  dom  and  of  knowledge.  (4)  And  this  I  say,  lest 
any  one  should  mislead  you  by  the  persuasiveness 

5  of  words.  (5)  For  though  I  am  separated  from 
you  in  the  flesh,  yet  I  am  with  you  m  spirit ;  and 
I  rejoice  at  beholding  your  good  order,  and  the 

6  stability  of  your  faith  in  the  Messiah. — {&)  As 
therefore  ye  have  received  Jesus  the  Messian  our 

7  Lord,  walk  ve  in   him,    (7^  strengthening  your 
roots  and  building  up  yourselves  in  him,  and  es-  ^ 
tablishing  yourselves  in  the  faith  which  ye  have  |2.0^orf>o\i^ 
learned,  in  which  may  ye  abound  in  thanksgiv- 

8  ing.  (8)  Beware,  lest  any  man  make  you  naked, 
by  philosophy,  *»  and  by  vain  deception,  according 
to  the  doctrines  of  men,  according  to  the  rudi- 
ments®  of  the  world,   and  not  according  to  the 

9  Messiah,  (9)  in  whom  dwelleth  all  the  fttUness^ 


•  Sy.  ]ja^, 

Gr.  d/yma. 


Sy. 


Gr.  goi-xsTa, 
d  Sy.  Ij^iwaS^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


368 


COLOSSIANS,   IIL 


•8f.Uocnll 


fUfhoilf. 


*  Off  BubsUmee. 


^  See  verse  8. 


of  the  Divinily«  oorporeallj.    (10)   And  in  him  10 
ye  are  also  complete,  becanse^he  is  the  head  of 
all  principalities  and   antl^oritiS!     (11)  "And  ~in"ll 
him  ye  have  been  circumcised  with  a  circumcision 
without  hands,  by  casting  oflF  the  flesh^  of  sins,  by 
a  ciicomcision  of  the  Messiah.     (12)  And  ye  have  12 
been  buried  with  him,  by  baptism ;  and  by  it  ye 
have  risen  with  him;   while  je  believed  in  me 
power  of  God,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead. 
(18)  And  you,  who  were  dead  in  your  sins,  and  by  18 
the  uncircumcision  of  your  flesh,  he  hath  vivified 
with  him;  and  he  hath  forgiven  us  all  our  sins: 
(14)  and,  by  his  mandates,  he  blotted  out  the  hand-  14 
writing  of  our  debts,  which  [handwriting]  existed 
i^nst  us,  and  took  [it]  from  the  midst,  and  affixed 
[it]  to  his  cross.    (15)  And,  by  yielding  up  his  Id 
body^  he  showed  fin^tempt  f<;^r  principalities  and     _ 


authorities;  and  put  them  to  shame,  openly,  in  his 
own  person. — (16)  Let  no  one  therefcre  oisquietJr  16 
you  about  food  and  drink,  or  about  the  distinctions 
of  festivals,  and  new  moons,  and  sabbaths  ;">  (17)  17 
which  were  shadows  of  the  things  then  future; 
but  the  body*  is  the  Messiah.     (18)  And  let  no  18 
one  wish,  by  abasing  the  mind,  to  bring  you  under 
bonds,  that  ye  subject  yourselves  to  the  worship 
of  angels ;    while  he  is  prying  into  that  which  he 
hath  not  seen,  and  is  vainly  inflated  in  his  fleshly 
mind,  (19)  and  holdeth  not  the  head,  from  which  19 
the  whole  body  is  framed  and  constructed,  with 
joints  and  members,  and  groweth  with  the  growth 
'  ;iyen]  of  God.— (20)  For  if  ye  are  dead  with  the  20 
essiah  from  the  rudiments'^  of  the  world,  why  are 
e  judged  as  if  ye  were  living  in  the  world?    (21)  21 
tut,  touch  thou  not,  and  taste  thou  not,  and  han- 
dle thou  not:  (22)  for  these  thinffs  perish  in  the  22 
using;  and  they  are  the  commandments  and  doc- 
trines of  men.     (23)  And  they  seem  to  have  a  kind  23 
of  wisdom,  in  a  show  of  humility,  and  of  the  fear 
of  God,  and  of  not  sparing  the  body ;  not  in  any 
thing  of  excellence,  but  in  things  subservient  to  the 
body. — (in.)  K  then  ye  have  risen  with  the  Mes-IIL 
siah,  seek  the  things  on  high,  where  the  Messiah 
sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God.    (2)  Think  of     2 
things  on  high ;  not  of  the  things  on  earth  :  (3)  for    8 
je  are  dead ;  and  your  life  is  hidden  with  the  Mes- 
siah, in  Gt>d.     (4)  And  when  the  Messiah,  who  is    4 


Digitized  by 


Google 


COLOSSIANS,    III. 


369 


our  life^^  shall  be  manifested,  then  shall  je  also  be 
manifested  with  him  in  gloiy. 
6      Mortify  therefore  your  members  that  are  on  the 
earth;  whoredom,  impurity,  and  the  passions,  and 
evil  concupiscence,  and  avarice  which  is  idolatry. 

6  f6)  For  on  account  of  these  [things],  the  wrath  of 

7  God  cometh  on  the  children  of  disobedience.     (7) 
And  in  these  [things]  ye  also  formerly  walked, 

8  when  ye  lived  in  them.    (8)  But  now,  put  away 
from  you  all  these,  wrath,  anger,  malice,  reviling, 

9  filthy  talking:  (9)  and  lie  not  one  to  another ;  but 

10  put  off  the  old  man,  with  all  his  practices ;  (10)  and 
put  ye  on  the  new  [man],  that  is  renewed  in  knowl- 

11  edge,  after  the  likeness  of  his  Creator ;  (11)  where^ 
there  is  neither  Jew  nor  Gentile,  ^^  neither  circum- 
cision nor  uncircumcision,  neither  Greek  nor  bar- 
barian, neither  bond  nor  free ;  but  the  Messiah  is 

12  all,  and  in  all. — (12)  Therefore,  holy  and  beloved, 
as  the  elect  of  God,  put  ye  on  compassions,  and  ten- 
derness, and  suavity,  and  humbleness  of  mind,  and 

IS  gentleness,  and  long  suflFering.  (13)  And  be  ye  in- 
dulgent towards  one  another,  and  forgiving  to  one 
another:  and  if  any  one  has  a  complaint  against 
his  neighbor,  as  the  Messiah  forgave  vou,  so  also 

14  do  ye  forgive.     (14)  And  with  all  these,   [join] 

15  love,  which  is  the  ffirdle*^  of  perfection.  (15)  And 
let  the  peace  of  the  Messiah  direct©  your  hearts ; 
for  to  that  ye  have  been  called,  in  one  body ;  and 

16  be  ye  thankful  to  the  Messiah. — (16)  And  let  his 
word  dwell  in  you  richly,  in  all  wisdom.  And 
teach  and  admonish  yourselves,  by  psalms  and 
hymns  and  spiritual  songs,  and  with  grace  in  your 

17  hearts  sing  ye  unto  Gk)d.  (17)  And  whatever  ye 
do  in  word  or  act,  do  it  in  the  name  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  give  thanksgiving  through 
him  to  God  the  Father. 

18  Wives,  be  ye  subject  to  your  husbands,  as  is  right 

19  in  the  Messiah.    (19)  Husbands,  love  ve  your  wives, 

20  and  be  not  bitter  towards  them. — (20)  Children, 
obey  your  parents  in  every  thing ;  for  tnis  is  pleas- 

21  ing  before  our  Lord.     (21)  Parents,  anger  not  your 

22  children,  lest  they  be  discouraged. — (22)  Servants, 
.  obey  in  all  things  your  bodily  masters '/  not  in  the 

sight  of  the  eye  only,  as  those  who  please  men,  but 

with  a  simple  heart,  and  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord. 

28  (28)  And  whatever  ye  do,  do  it  with  your  whole 


■  or,  fovrce  of 
life. 


^  L  e.  in  wkioh 
newwunt. 

«  Sy. 

.  Aramaean. 


^  Sy  \0Uj 

•  or,  lead, 
govern. 


'  or,  lordi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


370 


COLOSSIANS,    IV. 


a  lord. 


or :  wham. 


d  See  Num. 
zzzvL  11. 


>Sy. 


soul,  as  unto  our  Lord,  and  not  as  to  men :  (24)  and  24 
know  ye,  that  from  our  Lord  ye  will  receive  a 
recompense  as  the  inheritance;   for  ye  serve  the 
Lord  the  Messiah.     (25)  But  the  delinquent  will  25 
receive  a  recompense,  according  to  the  delinquency ; 
and  there  is  no  respect  of  persons. 

Masters,  do  equity  and  justice<^  to  your  servants;  IV. 
and  be  conscious  mat  ye  also  have  a  master^  in 
heaven. 

Persevere  in  prayer;  and  be  watchftd  in  it,  and    2 
in  ^ving  thanks.     (8)  And  pray  also  for  us,  that    3 
God  woiSd  open  to  us  a  door  of  speech,  for  uttering 
the  mystery  of  the  Messiah,  for  tne  sake  of  which® 
I  am  in  bonds ;  (4)  that  I  may  unfold  it,  and  utter    4 
it,  as  it  behoovetn  me.— (5)  Walk  in  wisdom  to-    5 
wards  them  without :  and  redeem  your  opportunity. 
(6)  And  let  your  speech  at  all  times  be  with  grace,     6 
as  it  were,  seasoned  with  salt :  and  know  ye,  how 
ye  ought  to  give  answer  to  every  man. 

And  what  is  [occurrent]  witn  me,  will  Tychicus     7 
make  known  to  you;  who  is  a  beloved  brother,  and 
a  &ithful  minister,  and  our  fellow-servant  in  the 
Lord :    (8)  whom  I  have  sent  to  you  for  this  pur-     8 
pose,  that  he  might  know  your  affairs,  and  might 
comfort  your  hearts;  (9)  together  with  Onesimus,     9 
a  feithful  and  beloved  brother,  who  is  from  among 
you.    These  will  make  known  to  you  what  is  [oc- 
current] with  us. — (10)  Aristarchus,  my  fellow-cap-  10 
tive,  saluteth  you ;  also  Marcus,  an  uncle's  son^  to 
Barnabas,  of  whom  ye  have  received  directions, 
that  if  he  come  to  you,  ye  may  kindly  receive  him : 
(11)  also  Jesus,e  who  is  called  Justus.  These  are  of  11 
the  circumcision,  and  they  only  have  aided  me  in 
the  kingdom  of  God ;  and  they  have  been  a  comfort 
to  me.    (12)  Epaphras  saluteth  you,  who  is  from  12 
among   you,  a  servant    of   the  Messiah,  always 
laboring  for  you  in  prayer,  that  ye  may  stand  per- 
fect and  complete  in  all  the  good  pleasure  of  Uod. 
(13)  For  I  testify  for  him,  that  he  hath  great  zeal  IS 
for  you,  and  for  them  of  Laodicea,  and  for  them  of 
Hierapolis.     (14)  Luke  the  physician,  our  beloved,  14 
saluteth   you,    also  Demas.      (15)   Salute  ye  the  15 
brethren  in  Laodicea,  andNymphas,  and  the  church 
in  his  house.    (16)  And  when  this  epistle  shall  have  16 
been  read  among  you,  cause  it  to  be  read  also  in  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I   THESSALONIANS,   L 


371 


chuTcli  of  the  Laodiceans ;  and  that  which  is  writ' 

17  ten  from  Laodicea,  do  ye  read.  (17)  And  say  to 
Archippns:  Be  attentive  to  the  ministry  which 
thou  hast  received  in  our  Lord,  that  thou  fulfill 

18  it. — (18)  This  salutation  is  by  the  hand  of  me 
Paul.  Eemember  my  bonds.  Grace  be  with  you. 
Amen. 


End  of  the  EpisUe  to  the  Coloseiaru  ;  which  was  written  from 
Romct  and  was  sent  by  the  haTuts  of  Tycl^cus, 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 


I.  Paul  and  Sylvanus  and  Timothy,  to  the  church 
of  the  Thessalonians,  which  is  in  (iod  the  Father 
and  in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah :  Grace  be  with 
you,  and  peace. 

2  We  give  thanks  to  God  at  all  times,  on  account 
of  you  all,  and  remember  you  continually  in  our 

8  prayers:  (8)  and  we  call  to  mind  before  God  the 
Fatner  the  works  of  your  faith,  and  the  toil  of  your 
love,  and  the  patience  of  your  hope  in  our  ix)rd 

4  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (4)  For  we  knowyour  election,* 

5  my  brethren,  beloved  of  God.  (5)  For  our  preach- 
ing among  you,  was  not  in  words  only;  but  also  in 
power,  and  in  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  in  genuine  per- 
suasion.   Ye  also  know,  how  we  were  among  you 

6  for  your  sakes.  (6)  And  ye  became  imitators  of 
us,  and  of  our  Lord,  in  that  ye  received  the  word 
in  great  afl^ction,  and  with  the  joy  of  the  Holy 

7  Spirit.  (7)  And  ye  were  a  pattern  for  all  the 
believers  who  are  in  Macedonia  and  in  Achaia. 

8  (8)  For  from  you  the  word  of  our  Lo^  sounded^* 
forth;  [and]  not  only  in  Macedonia  and  Achaia, 
but  in  every  place,  your  faith  in  God  is  heard  of; 
so  that  we  have  no  need  to  say  any  thing  concern- 

9  ing  you.  (9)  For  they  declare,  what  an  ingress 
we  liad  to  you,  and  how  ye  turned  from  the  wor- 


•  Sy. 


^  S7.  wii  heard 


Digitized  by 


Google 


372 


I  THBSSALONIANS,   II. 


-Sy. 


*ioy 


■  %y,  convened 


ship  of  idols  unto  God,  that  ye  might  worship  the 
living  and  true  God ;  (10)  while  ye  wait  for  his  Son  10 
from  neaven,  that  Jesus  whom  he  raised  from  the 
dead,  who  delivereth  us  from  the  wrath  to  come. 

And  ye   yourselves,   my  brethren,   know  :«ir  IT 
entrance  among  you,  that  it  was  not  in  vain :  (2)    2 
but  we  first  suflfered  and  were  treated  with  indignity, 
as  ye  know,  at  Philippi ;  and  then,  in  a  great  agony, 
with  confidence  in  our  Qt>d,*  we  addressed  to  you 
the  gospel  of  the  Messiah.     (3)  For  our  exhortation    8 
proceeded  not  from  deceit,  nor  from  impuritv,  nor  in 
guile :  (4)  but  as  we  had  been  approved  of  God  to    i 
be  intrusted  with  the  gospel,  so  we  speak,  not  as 
pleasing  men,  but  God  who  searcheth  bur  hearts. 
(5)  For  at  no  time  have  we  used  flattering  speech,     5 
as  ye  know ;  nor  a  cloak  of  cupidity,  God  is  wit- 
ness.     (6)  Neither  have  we  sought  glory  from     6 
men,  either  from  you  or  ftx)m.  others,  when  we 
might  have  been  chargeable    as  legates  of   the 
Messiah.    (7)  But  we  were  lowly  among  you;  and    7 
like  a  nurse,  who  fondleth^  her  children,  (8)  so  we    8 
also  fondled  [you],  and  were  desirous  to  impart  to 
you,  not  the  gospel  of  God  merely,  but  also  our  own 
soul,  because  ye  were  dear  to  us.    (9)  For  ye  recol-     9 
lect,  brethren,  that  we  labored  and  toiled,  working 
with  our  own  hands,  by  night  and  by  day,  that  we 
might  not  be  chargeable  to  any  one  of  you.   (10)  Ye  10 
are  witnesses,  and  God  [also],  how  we  preached  to 
you  the  gospel  of  God,  purely,  and  uprightly,  and 
were  blameless  towards  all  them  that  believe: 
(11)  as  yourselves  know,  we  entreated  each  one  of  11 
you,  as  a  father  his  children,  and  comforted*^  your 
hearts:   (12)  and  we  charged  you,  to  walk  as  it  12 
becometh  God,  who  hath  called  you  to  his  kingdom 
and  his  glory. — (18)  Therefore  also  we  give  thanks  18 
unceasingly  to  God,  that  the  word  of  G^  which  ye 
received  from  us,  ye  did  not  receive  as  the  word  of 
men,  but  as  being  truly  the  word  of  God,  which 
worketh  efficiently  in  you  and  in  them  that  believe. 
(14)  For  ye,  my  brethren,  became  assimilated  to  the  14 
churches  of  God  in  Judssa,  the  persons  who  are  in 
Jesus  the  Messiah ;  in  that  ye  so  suffered,  even  ye 
from  your  own  countrymen,  as  also  they  from  the 
Jews,  (15)  the  persons  who  slew  our  Lord  Jesus  the  15 
Measiaiii  and  persecuted  their  own  prophets  and  us; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   THESSALONIANS,   III. 


373 


and  they  please  not  God,  and  are  made  hostile  to  all 

16  men;  (16)  and  they  forbid  us  to  speak  to  the  Gen 
tiles,  that  they  may  have  life;^ — to  fill  up  their 
sins  at  all  times.  And  wrath  cometh  on  them  to 
the  uttermost. 

17  But  we,  my  brethren,  have  been  bereaved  of  you 
for  a  short  time,  (in  visible  presence,®  not  in 
our  hearts,)  and  have  the  more  exerted  ourselves, 

18  to  behold  your  faces,  with  great  affection.  (18) 
And  we  purposed  to  come  to  you, — I  Paul,  once 

19  and  again;  but  Satan  hindered  me.  (19)  For  what 
is  our  hope,  and  our  joy,  and  the  crown  of  our  glo- 
rying; unless  it  be  ye,  before  our  Lord  Jesus  at 

20  his  coming  ?.    (20)  For  ye  are  our  glory,  and  our 
m.  joy.— (III.)  And,  because  we  could  no  longer  en- 
dure it,  w;e  were  willing  to  be  left  alone  at  Athens, 

2  (2)  and  to  send  to  you  Timothy  our  brother^  a 
servant^  of  God,  and  our  assistant  in  the  announce- 
ment of  the  Messiah;   that  he  might  strengthen 

8  you,  and  inquire  of  you  respecting  your  faith :  (3) 
lest  any  of  you  should  be  disheartened^  by  these 
afflictions;   for  ye  know,  that  we  are  appointed 

4  thereto.  (4)  For  also  when  we  were  with  you,  we 
forewarned  you,  that  we  were  to  be  afflicted;  as 

5  ye  know  did  occur.  (5)  Therefore  also  I  could 
not  be  quiet,  until  I  sent  to  learn  vour  faith ;  lest 
the  Tempter  should  have  tempted  you,  and  our 

6  labor  have  been  in  vain. — (6)  But  now,  since 
Timothy  hath  come  to  us  from  among  you,  and 
hath  informed  us  respecting  your  faith  and  your 
love,  and  that  ye  have  a  gixxi  remembrance  of  us 
at  all  times,  and  that  ye  desire  to  see  us,  even  as 

7  we  [to  see]  you ; '  (7)  therefore  we  are  comforted  in 
you,  my  brethren,  amid  all  our  straits  and  afflic- 

8  tions,  on  account  of  your  faith.    (8)  And  now, 

9  we  live,c  if  ye  stand  fast  in  our  Lord.  (9)  For 
what  thanks  can  we  render  to  God  in  your  behalf 
for  all  the  ioy  with  which  we  are  joyral  on  your 

10  account ;  (10)  unless  it  be,  that  we  the  more  sup- 
plicate before  God,  by  night  and  by  day,  that  we 
may  see  your  faces,  and  may  perfect  what  is  lack- 

11  ing  in  your  faith  ?— (11.)  And  may  God  our  Father, 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  direct  our  way 

12  unto  you ;  (12)  and  increase  and  enlarge  your  love 
towards  one  another,  and  towards  all  men,  even  as 

IS  we  love  you ;  (IS)  and  establish  your  hearts  un- 


^  or,  he  saved 


Sy.  by  face 


■  or,  mmuUr, 


Sy. 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


374 


I  THESSALONIANS,    IV. 


^pn/o  m,  ipO 


^Bj  he  in  need 


'\ 


OQjSir: 


blamable  in  holiness,  before  God  our  Father;  at 
the  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  with 
all  his  saints. 

Wherefore,  my  brethren,  I  entreat  you,  and  IV 
beseech  you  by  our  Lord  Jesus,  that,  as  ye  have 
received  from  us  how  ye  ought  to  walk,  and  to 
please  God,  so  ye  would  make  progress  more  and 
more.  (2)  For  ye  know  what  command  we  gave  you    2 
in  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.     (8)  For  this  is  the    8 

Eleasure  of  God,  your  sanctification ;»  and  that  ye 
e  separated  from  all  whoredom ;  (4)  and  that  each    4 
one  of  you  might  know  how  to  possess  his  vessel, 
in  sanctity  and  in  honor ;  (5)  and  not  in  the  concu-    5 
piscence  of  lust,  like  the  rest  of  the  Gentiles  who 
know  not  God :  (6)  and  that  ye  dju^  not  to  trans-    6 
gress  and  to  overreach  any  one  his  brother,  in  this 
matter ;  because  our  Lord  is  the  avenger  of  all  these, 
as  also  we  have  said  and  testified  to  you  in  time    7 

East  (7)  For  God  did  not  call  you  unto  impurity, 
ut  to  sanctification.    (8)  He  therefore  who  spurn-    8 
eth,  spumeth  not  man  but  God-,  who  hath  given 
his  Holy  Spirit  in  you. — (9)  Now  concerning  love    9 
to  the  brethren,  ye  need  not  that  I  should  write  to 
you ;  for  ye  yourselves  are  taught  of  God  to  love 
one  another.     (10)  Ye  likewise  do  so,  to  all  the  10 
brethren  who  are  m  all  Macedonia :  but  I  entreat 
you,  my  brethren,  to  be  exuberant:  (11)  and  that  11 
ye  strive  to  be  quiet,  and  to  attend  to  your  own 
afl&irs ;  and  that  ye  labor  with  your  own  hands,  as 
we  directed  vou ;  (12)  and  that  ye  walk  becoming-  12 
ly  towards  those  without ;  and  that  ye  be  depend- 
ent^ on  no  man. 

And,  I  wish  you  to  know,  my  brethren,  that  ye  18 
should  not  mourn  over  them  who  have  fallen 
asleep,  like  other  people  who  have  no  hope.    (14)  14 
For  if  we  believe  that  Jesus  died  and  rose  again, 
even  so  them  who  sleep,  will  God,  by  Jesus,  bring 
with  him.     (15)  And  this  we  say  to  you^  by  the  15 
word  of  our  Lord,  that  we  who  mav  survive  and  be 
alive,  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord,  sliall  not  precede 
them  who  have  slept.    (16)  Because  our  Lord  will  16 
himself  descend  from  heaven,  with  the  mandate,® 
and  with  the  voice  of  the  chief  angel,  and  with  the 
trump  of  God ;  and  the  dead  who  are  in  the  Mes- 
siah, will  first  arise;  (17)  and  then,  we  who  survive  17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   THESSALONIANS,   V. 


376 


and  are  alive  shall  be  caught  up  together  with  them 
to  the  clouds,  to  meet  our  Lord  in  the  air ;  and  so 
18  shall  we  be  ever  with  our  Lord.    (18)  Wherefore, 
comfort  ye  one  another  with  these  words. 

V.      But  concerning  the  times  and  seasons,  my  breth- 

2  ren,  ye  need  not  that  I  write  to  you ;  (2)  for  ye 

know  assuredly,  that  the  day  of  our  jjord  so 

8  oometh,  as  a  thief  by  night.     (3)  While  they  will 

be  saying,  Peace  and  quietness,  then  suddenly  de* 

struction  will  burst  upon  them,  as  distress  upon  a 

4  child-bearer,  and  they  will  not  escape. — (4)  'But 
ye,  my  brethren,  are  not  in  darkness,  that  that  day 

5  should  overtake  you  as  a  thief.  (5)  For  ye  are 
all  children  of  the  light,  and  children  of  the  day ; 
and  are  not  children  of  the  night,  and  children  fit 

6  darkness.  (6^  Let  us  not  therefore  sleep,  like 
others;    but  let  us  be  vigilant  and  considerate.* 

7  (7)  For  they  who  sleep,  Seep  in  the  night;  and 
they  who  are  drunken,  are  drunken  in  the  night 

8  (8)  But  let  us  who  are  children  of  the  day,  be 
wakeful  in  mind,  and  put  on  the  breastplate  of 
fisdth  and  love,  and  take**  the  helmet  of  the  hope 

9  of  life®.  (9)  For  God  hath  not  appointed  us  to 
wrath,  but  to  the  acquisition  of  life^,  by  our  Lord 

10  Jesus  the  Messiah:  (10)  who  died  for  us«,  that 
whether  we  wake  or  sleqp,  we  miffht  live  together 

11  with  him.  (11)  Therefore  comfort  one  another, 
and  edify  one  another,  as  also  ye  have  done. 

-And  we  entreat  you,  my  brethren,  that  ye  recog- 
nize them  who  labor  among  you,  and  who  stand 
before  your  feces^  in  our  Lord,  and  instruct  you : 
(13)  that  they  may  be  esteemed  by  you  with  abun- 
oant  love ;  and,  on  account  of  their  work,  live  ye  in 

14  harmonyflr  with  them.  (14)  And  we  entreat  you, 
my  brethren,  that  ye  admonish  the  faulty,  and  en- 
courage the  faint-hearted,  and  bear  the  burdens  of 
the  weak,  and  be  long  suffering  towards  all  men. 

15  (15)  And  beware,  lest  any  of  you  return  evil  for 
evil,  but  always  follow^  good  deeds,  towards  one 

16  another,  and  towards  all  men. — (16)  And  be  joyful 

17  always.  (17)  And  pray  without  ceasing.  (18)  And 

18  in  every  thing  be  thankful :  For  this  is  the  pleas- 

19  ure  of  &od  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  concerning  you. 

20  (19)  Quench  not  the  Spirit.  (20)  Despise  not  pro- 

21  phesying.    (21)  Explore  every  thing,  and  hold  fast 


12 


18 


or,  salvatum, 
or,  sahatum. 
Sy. 


Sy. 


Sy.  run  aftet 


Digitized  by 


Google 


376 


S  THESSALONIANS,  L 


the  good:  (22)  and  fly  from  eyerj  thing  evil  22 
(28)  And  may  the  God  of  peaoe  sanctify  you  all,  23 
peifeotly,  and  keep  blameless  jour  whole  spirit, 
and  vour  soul,  and  your  body,  till  the  coming  of 
our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (24]  FaithM  is  he  24 
that  hath  called  you,  who  will  do  it 

My  brethren,  pray  for  us. — (26)  Salute  all  our  26 
brethren  with  a  holy  kiss.    (27)  I  conjure  you  by  27 
our  Lord,  that  this  epistle  be  read  to  all  the  holy 
brethren. — (28]  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  28 
Messiah  be  witn  you.    Amen. 

End  of  the  first  Epistle  to  the  ThessahmUms ;  which  was 
written  Jrom  Athens^  and  toas  sent  hy  the  hands  cf  IHmothy. 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Paul  to  the  Thessalonians. 


"  Sy.  ^OQu»Z> 


>Sy.]]. 
Sy.lZi^im 


Paul  and  Sylvanus  and  Timothy,  to  the  church 
of  the  Thessalonians,  which  is  in  God  our  Father 
and  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah :  (2)  Qf  ace  be  with 
you,  and  peace,  firom  God  our  Father,  and  fix)m  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

We  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  Gtod  always,  on 
your  account,  my  brethren,  as  it  is  proper ;  because 

irour  Mth  groweth  exceedingly,  and,  in  you  all,  the 
ove  of  each  for  his  fellow- increaseth.  (4)  Inso- 
much that  we  also  boast  of  you  in  the  churches  of 
God,  on  account  of  your  faith,  and  your  patience  in 
all  the  persecution  and  trials  that  ye  endure ;  {&)  for 
a  demonstration  of  the  righteous  judgment  of  God; 
that  ye  may  be  worthy  *  of  his  kingdom,  on  account 
of  which  ye  suffer.  (6)  And  since  it  is  a  righteous 
thing  with  God,  to  recompense  trouble  to  them  that 
trouble  ;y^ou :  (7)  and  you,  who  are  the  troubled,  he 
will  vivify,  with  us,  at  the  manifestation  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  from  heaven,  with  the  hosf^ 
of  his  angels;  (8)  when  he  will  execute  vengeance, 
with  the  burning®  of  fire,  on  them  that  know  not 
Gbd,  and  on  them  that  acknowledge  not  the  gospel^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


S  TUESSALONIANS,   II. 


877 


9  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (9)  For  these  will 
be  recompensed  with  the  judgment  of  eternal 
destruction,  from  the  presence  of  our  Lord,  and 

10  from  the  glory  of  his  power ;  (10)  when  he  shall 
come  to  be  glorified  in  his  saints,  and  to  display  his 
wonders  in  his  faithful  ones;  for  our  testimony 
concerning  you,  will  be  believed,  in  that  day. — 

11  n.1)  Therefore  we  pray  for  you,  at  all  times ;  that 
God  would  make  you  worthy  of  your  calling,  and 
would  fill  you  with  all  readiness  for  good  deeds, 

12  and  with  the  works  of  faith  by  power ;  (12)  so  that 
the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  may  be 
glorified  in  you,  (and)  ye  also  in  him ;  according 
to  the  grace  of  God,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah. 

n.  But  we  entreat  of  you,  my  brethren,  in  regard  to 
the  coming  of  our  Ijord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  in 

2  respect  to  our  being  congregated  unto  him,  (2)  that 
ye  be  not  soon  agitated  in  your  mind,  nor  be 
troubled, — neither  by  word,  nor  by  spirit,  nor  by 
letter,  as  coming  from  us, — that  lo,  the  day  of  our 

8  Lord  is  at  hand.  (3)  Let  no  one  deceive  you  in  any 
way ;  because  [that  day  will  not  come],  unless  there 
previously  come  a  defection,  ^  and  that  man  of  sin 

4  be  revealed,  the  son  of  perdition ;  (4)  who  is  an 
opposer,  and  exalteth  himself  above  all  that  is  called 
God  and  Worshipful ;»»  so  that  he  also  sitteth  in 
the  temple  of  God,  as  a  God,  and  displayeth  him- 

6  sel^  as  if  he  were  God. — (5)  Do  ye  not  remember, 
that^  when  I  was  with  you,  I  told  you  these  things? 

6  (6)  And  now,  ye  know  what  hindereth  his  being 

7  manifested  in  his  time.  (7)  For  the  mystery  of  the 
evil  One  already  beginnetn  to  be  operative:  and 
only,  if  that  which  now  hindereth  snail  be  taken 

8  from  the  midst; — (8)  then  at  length  will  that  evil 
One  be  revealed ;  whom  our  Lord  Jesus  will  con- 
sume by  the  breath^  of  his  mouth,  and  will  bring  to 

9  naught  by  the  visibility  of  his  advent  (9)  For  the 
coming  of  that  [evil  One],  is  the  working  of  Satan, 
with  all  power,  and  signs,  and  lying  wonders, 

10  (10)  and  with  all  the  deceptiveness  of  iniquity,  in 
them  that  perish ;  because  they  did  not  receive  the 
love  of  the  truth,  by  which  they  might  have  life.^ 

11  (11)  Therefore  God  will  send  upon  them  the  opera- 
tion of  deception,  that  they  may  believe  a  lie; 


Digitized  by 


or,  rebellion. 


»»  Sy.  Xi^jo 


Sy.  wK»0|^ 


4  or,  be  saved. 


Google 


378 


a  THBSSALONIANS,  III. 


*  or,  MhMtfton. 


-Sy. 
Gr.  disorderly. 


Gr.  disorderly^ 


12 


18 


15 
16 


(12)  and  that  they  all  may  be  condemned,  who  be- 
lieve not  the  truth,  but  have  pleasure  in  iniquity. 
— (13)  But  we  are  bound  to  give  thanks  to  God  al- 
ways, on  your  accoiint,  my  brethren  beloved  of  our 
Lord,  that  God  hath  from  the  beginning  chosen 
you  unto  life,®  through  sanctification  of  the  Spirit, 
and  through  faith  in  the  truth.  (14)  For  unto  these  14 
it  was,  that  God  called  you  by  our  preaching ;  that 
ye  might  be  the  glory  to  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah. (15)  Therefore,  my  brethren,  be  established, 
and  persevere  in  the  precepts  which  ye  have  been 
tauffnt,  whether  by  word  or  by  our  epistle.  (16J 
And  may  pur  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  himself  ana 
God  our  Father,  who  hath  loved  us,  and  given  us 
everlasting  consolation  and  a  good  hope  through 
his  grace,  (17)  comfort  your  hearts,  and  establish  17 
[you]  in  every  good  word,  and  in  every  good 
work. 


Henceforth,  brethren,  pray  ye  for  us,  that  theHL 
word  of  our  Lord  may,  in  every  place,  run  and  be 
fflorified,  as  with  you ;  (2)  and  that  we  may  be    2 
delivered  from  evil  and  perverse  men  ;  for  faith  is 
not  in  all.    (3)  And  faithful  is  the  Lord,  who  will    3 
keep  you  and  rescue  you  from  the  evil  One.    (4)    4 
And  we  have  confidence  in  you,  through  our  Lord, 
that  what  we  have  inculcated  on  you,  ye  both  have 
done,  and  will  do.     (5)  And  may  our  Lord  direct    5 
your  hearts  to  the  love  of  God,  and  to  a  patient 
waiting  for  the  Messiah. — (6)  And  we  enjoin  upon 
you,  my  brethren,  in  the  name  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  that  ye  withdraw  from  every  brother 
who  walketh  wickedly, »  and  not  according  to  the 
precepts  which  ye  received  from  us.    (7)  For  ye 
know  how  ye  ought  to  imitate  us,  who  did  not 
walk  wickedly  among  you.     (8)  Neither  did  we 
eat  bread  gratuitously  from  an  v  of  you ;  but,  with 
toil  and  weariness,  we  labored  by  night  and  by  day, 
that  we  might  not  be  burdensome  to  any  of  you. 
(9)  It  was  not  because  we  have  ro  authority,^  but 
that  we  might  give  you  an  example  in  ourselves, 
that  ye  might  imitate  us.     (10)  And  while  we  were 
with  you,  we  also  gave  you  this  precept,  That  every 
one  who  would  not  work,  should  likewise  not  eat 
(11)  For  we  hear,  there  are  some  among  you  who  11 
walk  wickedly,  <5  and  do  nothing  except  vain  things. 


6 


8 


10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  TIMOTHY,   L 


879 


12  (12)  Now  such  persons,  we  command  and  exhort, 
by  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  in  quietness 

18  they  work,  and  eat  their  own  bread.  (18)  And 
my  brethren,  let  it  not  be  wearisome  to  you,  to  do 

14  what  is  good.^  (14)  And  if  any  one  hearkeneth 
not  to  these  [my]  words  in  this  epistle,  separate 
that  man  from  you,  and  have  no  intimacy  with  him, 

15  that  he  may  be  ashamed.  (15)  Yet,  hold  him  not 
as  an  enemy,  but  admonish  him  as  a  brother. — 

16  (16)  And  may  the  Lord  of  peace  give  you  peace, 
always,  in  every  thing.    Our  Lord  be  with  you  all. 

17  The  salutation  in  the  writing  of  my  own  hand,  I 
Paul  have  written  it ;  which  is  the  token  in  all  my 

18  epistles,  so  I  write.  (18)  The  grace  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  be  with  you  all,  my  brethren.    Amen. 

End  if  the  second  Epistle  to  the  ThessdUmians ;  which  was 
written  from  Laodicea  if  Pindia^and  was  sent  hy  the  hands  (f 
Ty/Mcus, 


Sy. 


The  First  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 


L  Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  by  the 
command  of  God  our  life-giver, »  and  of  the  Mes- 

2  siah,  Jesus  our  hope ;  (2)  to  Timothy,  [my]  true 
son  in  the  faith :  grace  and  mercy  and  peace,  from 
God  our  Father,  and  the  Messiah,  Jesus  our  Lord. 

8  When  I  was  going  into  Macedonia,  I  requested 
thee  to  remain  at  Ephesus,  and  to  charge  certain 

4  persons  not  to  teach  different  doctrines;  (4)  and 
not  to  throw  themselves  into  fables  and  stories 
about  genealogies,  of  which  there  is  no  end,  which 
produce  contention  rather  than  edification  in  the 

5  faith  of  God. — (5)  Now  the  end^  of  the  command 
is  love,  which  is  from  a  pure  heart,  and  from  a 

6  good  conscience,  and  from  true  faith.  (6)  But  from 
uiese  some  have  strayed,  and  have  turned  aside  to 

7  vain  words ;  (7)  because  they  wished  to  be  teachers 


Digitized  by 


■  or,  OUT  Sa- 
viour. 


i.  e.  scope^ 
design. 


Google 


380 


1  TIMOTHY,   11. 


»Sj.|^i2L» 


d  Sy.  Oospd  of 
tbegloryof, 
€fC» 


«  or,  to  save. 


Sy.  o^pO 


of  the  law,  while  they  understood  not  what  thev 
speak,  nor  the  thing  about  which  they  contend. 

(8)  Now,  we  know,  that  the  law  is  a  gooa<^  thing,  if     8 
a  man  conduct  himself  in  it,  according  to  the  law, 

(9)  he  knowing  that  the  law  was  not  established  for    9 
the  righteous,  but  for  the  evil,  and  the  rebellious, 
and  the  ungodly,  and  the  sinful,  and  the  perverse, 
and  for  the  impure,  and  for  smiters  of  their  fethers 
and  smiters  of  their  mothers,  and  for  murderers, 
(lOJ  and  for  whoremongers,  and  for  copulators  with  10 
males,  and  for  the  steSers  of  free  people,  and  for 
liars,  and  for  violators  of  oaths,  and. for  whatever  is 
contrary  to  sound  doctrine,  (11)  [namely]  that  of  11 
the  glorious  gospel^  of  the  blessed  God,  with  which 

am  intrusted.     (12)    And  I  thank  him   who  12 
strengthened  me,  [even]  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah; who  accounted  me  faithful,  and   appointed 
me  to  his  ministry ;  (13)  me  [I  say],  who  before  18 
was  a  blasphemer,  and- a  persecutor,  and  a  reviler; 
but  I  obtained  mercy,  because  I  did  it  while  igno- 
rant and  without  faith.     (14)  And  in  me  the  grace  14 
of  our  Lord  abounded,  and  faith  and  love,  which 
is  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.   (15)  FaithM  is  the  dec-  15 
laration,  and  worthy  to  be  received,  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  came  into  the  world  to  givelife®  to  sinners, 
of  whom  I  was  the  primary/     (16)  But  for  this  16 
cause  had  he  mercy  on  me,  that  in  me  first  Jesus 
the  Messiah  might  display  all  his  long  suffering,  for 
an  example  to  them  who  were  to  believe  on  him 
unto  life  eternat     (17)  And  to  the  king  eternal,  17 
incorruptible,  and  invisible,  the  sole  God,  be  honor 
and  glory  for  ever  and  ever !     Amen. —-(18)  This  18 
injunction  I  commit  to  thee,  my  son  Timotny,  ac- 
cording to  the  former  predictions  concerning  thee, 
that  in  them  thou  mightest  war  this  good  warfare, 

(19)  in  faith  and  a  good  conscience ;  for  they  who  19 
have  repudiated  this,  have  become  destitute  of  faith ; 

(20)  like  Hymeneus  and  Alexander,  whom  I  have  20 
delivered  up  to  Satan,  that  they  may  learn  not  to 

be  blasphemers. 

I  exhort  thee,  therefore,  first  of  all,  that  thou  IL 
present  to  God  supplication,  and  prayer,  and  inter- 
cession, and  thanksgiving,  for  all   men:   (2)  for    2 
kings  and  magistrates,  that  we  may  dwell  in  a  quiet 
and  tranc[uil  habitation,  with  all  reverence  for  God, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   TIMOTHY,   IIL 


381 


8  and  with  purity.    (8)  For  this  is  good  and  accept- 

4  able  before  God  our  life-giver  ;*  ^4)  who  would 
have  all  men  live,^  and  be  converted  to  the  knowl- 

5  edge  of  the  truth.  (6)  For  God  is  one ;  and  the 
mediator^  between  God  and  men  is  one,  [namelv] 

6  the  man  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (6)  who  gave  himself  a 
ransom^  for  every  man ; — ^a  testimony  that  arrived 

7  in  due  time,  (7)  of  which  I  am  constituted  a  herald 
and  legate.  I  speak  the  truth,  and  do  not  lie,  for  I 
am  the  teacher  of  the  Gentiles  in  the  belief  of  the 

8  truth. — {S)  I  desire  therefore,  that  men  may  prav 
in  every  place,  while  they  lift  up  their  hands  witn 
purity,  without  wrath,  and  without  disputations. 

9  (9^  So  also,  that  women  [appear]  in  a  chaste  fashion 
of  dress ;  and  that  their  adorning  be  with  modestv 
and  chastity  ;  not  with  curls,  or  with  gold,  or  witn 

10  pearls,  or  with  splendid  robes ;  (10)  but  with  good 
works,  as  becometh  women  who  profess  reverence 

11  for  God. — (11)  Let  a  woman  learn  in  silence,  with 

12  all  submission :  (12)  for  I  do  not  allow  a  woman  to 
teach,  or  to  be  assuming  over  the  man ;  but  let  her 

18  remain  in  stillness.    (13)  For  Adam  was  first  form- 

14  ed,  and  then  Eve.  (14)  And  Adam  was  not  seduced, 
but  the  woman  was  seduced  and  transgressed  the 

15  command.  (15J  Yet  she  shall  live«  bv  means  of 
her  children,  ii  they  continue  in  the  iaith,  and  in 
love,  and  in  sanctity,  and  in  chastity. 

IIL  It  is  a  faithful  saying,  that  if  a  man  desireth  the 
2  eldership,*  he  desireth  a  good  work.  (2)  And  an 
elder^  ought  to  be  such,  that  no  blame  can  be  found 
in  him ;  and  he  should  be  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
with  a  vigilant  mind,  and  sober  and  regular  [in  his 
habits],  and  affectionate  to  strangers,  and  instruct- 
8  ive ;®  (8)  and  not  a  transgressor  in  regard  to  wine, 
and  whose  hand  is  not  swift  to  stnke;  but  he 
should  be  humble,  and  not  contentious,  nor  a  lover 

4  of  money ;  (4)  and  one  that  guideth^  well  his  own 
house,  and  holdeth  his  chil(fien  in  subjection  with 

5  all  purity.  (5)  For  if  he  knoweth  not  how  to  guide 
his  own  house  well,  how  can  he  guide  the  church 

6  of  God.  (6)  Neither  let  him  be  of  recent  disciple- 
ship  ;  lest  he  be  uplifted,  and  fall  into  the  condemna- 

7  tion  of  Satan.  (7)  And  there  ought  to  be  good 
testimony  of  him  n*om  those  without ;  lest  he  fall 

8  into  reproach  and  the  snare  of  Satan.— (8)  And  ao 


■  or,  Saviour, 
*>  or,  be  saved, 

•  Sy.  ]^v.^ 

*Sy. 


•  or,  be  saved. 


Sy. 
theGr.ii^Kfxo^'ii 

6r.  ^^/(fxo^ot 

Sy.  ^ 

*Sy  jr^iiOO 


Digitized  by 


Google 


382 


1  TIMOTHY,   IV. 


•Sy. 

Gr.  iioixovoi. 
'Sy. 


«Sy.l^j 


*  Sy. 


*  or,  o^ofiitna- 


also  the  deacons®  should  be  pure,  and  not  speak 
double,  nor  incline  to  much  wine,  nor  love  base 
gains ;  (9)  but  should  hold  the  mystery  of  the  faith    9 
with  a  pure  conscience.    (10)  And  let  them  be  first  10 
tried,  and  then  let  them  serve,^  if  they  are  without 
blame.    (11)  So  also  should  the  wives  be  chaste,  11 
and  of  vigilant  minds ;  and  they  should  be  &ithful    * 
in  all  things;  and  they  should  not  be  slanderers. 
(12^  Let  the  deacons  be  such  as  have  each  one  wife,  12 
ana   guide  well  their  children  and  households. 
(IS)  For  they  who  serve  well  [as  deacons],  procure  13 
for  themselves  a  good  degree,fir  and  much  boldness 
in  the  faith  of  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

These  things  I  write  to  thee,  while  hoping  soon  14 
to  come  to  thee ;  (15)  but  if  I  should  delay,  that  16 
thou  mayest  know  how  thou  oughtest  to  conduct 
thyself  in  the  house  of  Gbd,  which  is  the  church  of 
the  living  God.* — ^The  pillar  and  the  foundation  of 
the  truth,  (16)  and  truly  great,  is  this  mystery  of  16 
righteousness,^  which  was  revealed'  in  the  flesh,  and 
justified  in  the  spirit,  and  seen  bv  angels,  and  pro- 
claimed among  the  Gentiles,  and  believed  on  in  the 
world,  and  received  up  into  glory. — (TV.)  But  the  IV. 
Spirit  saith  explicitly,  that  in  the  latter  times,  some 
will  depart  from  the  faith ;  and  will  go  after  decep- 
tive spirits,   and  after  the  doctrine  of   demons. 

(2)  These  will  seduce,  by  a  false  appearance ;  and  will    2 
utter  a  lie,  and  will  be  seared  in  their  conscience ; 

(3)  and  will  forbid  to  marry;   and  will  require    3 
abstinence  from  meats,  which  God  hath  createa  for 
use  and  for  thankfulness,  by  them  who  believe  and 
know  the  truth.    (4)  Because  whatever  is  created    4 
by  God  is  good;  and  there  is  nothing  which  should 
be  rejected"  if  it  be  received  with  thankfulness ; 
(5)  for  it  is  sanctified  by  the  word  of  God  and  by    5 
prayer. — (6)  If  thou  shalt  inculcate  these  things  on    6 
thy  brethren,  thou  wilt  be  a  good  minister*>  of  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  being  educated  in  the  language  of  the 
feith,  and  in  the  good  doctrine  which  thou  hast 
been  taught.    (7)  But  the  silly  tales  of  old  women,     7 
shun  thou;  and  occupy  thyself  with  righteousness. 
(8)  For,  exercising  the  body  is  profitable  a  little    8 

*  The  stractare  of  these  sentences  is  the  same  in  the  Syriac  and  in  the  Greek : 
and  by  following  the  punctuation  of  Griesbach,  Knapp,  and  other  modern  editors 
of  the  Greek  Testament,  the  Syriao  is  accurately  translated  as  above.  The  read- 
ing of  %g  or  St  instead  of  0so^,  in  verse  16,  is  supported  by  the  Syriac  veraioiL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   TIMOTHY,    V. 


383 


while ;  but  righteousness  is  every  way  profitable  and 

hath  promise  of  the  life  of  the  present  time  and  of  that 

9  to  come.  (9)  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of 

10  reception.  (10)  For  on  this  account,  we  toil  and  suffer 
reproach ;  because  we  trust  in  the  living  God,  who 
is  the  life-giver«  of  all  men,  especially  of  the  believers. 

11  (11)  These  things  teach  thou,  and  inculcate. 

12  And  let  no  one  despise  thy  youth ;  but  be  thou  a 
pattern  for  the  believers,  in  speech,  and  in  behavior, 

18  and  in  love,  and  in  faith,  and  in  purity.  (18)  Un- 
til I  come,  be  diligent  in  reading,  and  in  prayer, 

14  and  in  teaching.  (14)  Despise  not  the  gift  that  is 
in  thee,  which  was  given  thee  by  prophecy,  and  by 

15  the  laying  on  of  the  hand  of  the  eldership.^  (15)  On 
these  things  meditate ;  give  thyself  wholly  to  them : 
that  it  may  be  obvious  to  all  that  thou  makest  ad- 

16  vanoes.  (16)  Be  attentive  to  thyself  and  to  thy 
teaching ;  and  persevere  in  them.  For  in  doing 
this,  thou  wilt  procure  life«  to  thyself  and  to  them 

Y.  who  hear  thee.— (V.)  Ohide  not  an  elder,*  but 
entreat  him  as  a  father;  and  the  younger  men,  as 

2  thy  brothers;  (2)  and  the  elder  women,  *>  as  mothers; 
and  the  younger  women,  as  thy  sisters,  with  all 

3  purity.— (8)  Honor  widows,  who  are  truly  widows. 

4  (4)  But  if  a  widow  hath  children,  or  grandchildren, 
let  them  first  learn  to  show  kindness  to  their  own 
households,  and  to  repay  the  obligations  to  their 

5  parents ;  for  this  is  acceptable  before  God.  (5)  Now 
she  who  is  truly  a  widow,  and  solitary, — ^her  hope 
is  in  Gbd ;  and  she  persevereth  in  prayers,  and  in 

6  supplications,  by  night  and  by  day :  (6)  But  she 
who  foUoweth  pleasure,  is  dead  while  sne  liveth. 

7  (7)  These  things  enjoin  thou  on  them,  that  they 

8  may  be  blameless.  (8)  But  if  any  one  careth  not 
for  them  who  are  his  own,  and  especially  for  them 
who  are  of  the  household*^  of  faith,  he  hath  rejected 
the  faith,   and  is    worse    than    the    unbelievers. 

9  (9)  Therefore  elect  thou  the  widow,  who  is  not  less 
than  sixty  years  [old],  and  who  hath  been  the  wife 

10  of  one  man,  (10)  and  hath  a  reputation  for  good 
works ; — if  she  have  trained  up  children,  if  she  nave 
entertained  strangers,  if  she  have  washed  the  feet 
of  saints,  if  she  have  relieved  the  afflicted,  if  she 

11  have  walked  in  every  good  work.  (11)  But  the 
younger  widows  do  tnou  reject;  for  they  wax  wan- 
ton^ against  the  Messiah,  and  desire  to  be  married : 


•  or,  Saviour 


|/0  a  ■  d  O 


•  or,  save, 

•►Sy. 
1^  a  I  a  n 


Sy.  9ont  of  the 
home. 


'aj.^"^^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


384 


1   TIMOTHY,    VL 


»Sf. 


«S]r.)jiLAjttjD 


^  Some  copies 
read  men. 


Sy.  IZOi^ilk 


(12)  and  their  condemnation  is  fixed,  because  thej  12 
have  cast  oflf  their  former  faith.     (13)  And  they  13 
also  learn  idleness,  wandering  from  house  to  house; 
and  not  only  idleness,  but  sUso  to  talk  much,  and 
to  pursue  vanities,  and  to  utter  what  they  ought 
not    (14)  I  would  therefore,  that  the  younger  wo-  14 
men  marry,  and  bear  children,  and  regulate  their 
houses ;  and  that  they  give  no  occasion  to  the  ad- 
versary for  reproach.     (15)  For  some  have  already  15 
begun  to  turn  aside  after  Satan.    (16)  If  any  b^  16 
lieving  man  or  believinff  woman  have  widows,  let 
them  support  them ;  and  let  them  not  be  a  burden 
on  the  church ;  so  that  there  may  be  a  sufficiency 
for  such  as  are  really  widows. — (l7)  Let  the  elders®  17 
who  conduct^  themselves  well,  be  esteemed  worthy 
of  double  honor ;  especially  they  who  labor  in  the 
word  and  in  doctrine.    (18)  For  the  scripture  saith,  18 
Thou  shalt  not  muzzle  the  ox  in  threshing;  and, 
The  laborer  is  worthy  of  his  pay. — (19)  Against  an  19 
elder,'  receive  not  a  complaint,  except  at  tne  mouth 
of  two  or  three  witnesses. — (20)  Those  who  sin  be-  20 
fore  alL  rebuke;  that  the  rest  of  the  people  may 
fear.— (21)  I  charge  thee,  before  God,  and  our  Lorn  21 
Jesus  me  Messiah,  and  his  elect  angels,  that  thou 
observe  these  things ;  and  let  not  your  mind  be 
preoccupied  by  any  thing :  and  do  nothing  with  a 
respect  for  persons. — (22)  Lay  not  the  hjmd  hastily  22 
on  any  man ;  and  participate  not  in  the  sins  of 
others;    keep  thyself  pure.---(23)  And  hereafter  23 
drink  not  water,  but  drink  a  little  wine ;  on  account 
of  thy  stomach,  and  thy  continuing  infirmities. — 
(24^  There  are  persons,  whose  sins  are  known,  and  24 
go  Wore  them  to  the  place  of  judgment ;  and  there 
are  some,  whom  they  follow  after.    (25)  So  also  25 
good  deeds^  are  known :  and  those  which  are  other- 
wise cannot  be  hid. 

Let  them  who  are  under  the  yoke  of  servitude,  *VL 
hold  their  masters  in  all  honor ;  lest  the  name  of 
God  and  his  doctrine  be  reproached.  (2)  And  let  2 
them  who  have  believing  masters,  not  treat  them 
with  disrespect,  because  they  are  their  brethren; 
but  let  them  be  more  obedietit,  because  they  are 
believers  and  beloved,  in  whose  service  they  enjoy 
quietnesa  These  things  teach  thou,  and  request  of 
them. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I   TIMOTHY,   VL 


386 


3  But  if  there  be  any  one,  who  teacheth  a-different 
doctrine,  and  doth  not  accede  to  the  salutary  words 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  to  the  doctrine 

4  of  the  fear  of  God,  (4)  he  is  one  that  exalteth  him- 
ael^  while  he  knoweth  nothing;  and  he  langdish- 
eth*»  in  the  search  and  inquiry  about  words,  from 
which  come  envy,  and  contention,  and  rsuling^  and 

fi  evil  surmising,  (6)  and  the  disputation  of  men^ 
whose  minds  are  corrupt  and  destitute  of  the  truth, 
and  who  suppose  that  gain  is  godliness.    But  from 

6  these  stand  thou  aloof.  (6)  But  great  is  our  gain, 
which  is  the  fear  of  Gted,  with  the  use  of  our  com- 

7  petence.  (7)  For  we  brought  nothing  into  the 
world ;  and  we  know  that  we  can  carry  nothing  out 

8  of  it    (8)  Therefore,  food  and  clothing  satisfy  us. 

9  (9)  But  uiey  who  desire  to  become  rich,  fall  into  tempr 
tations,  and  into  snares,  and  into  many  lusts  wBidi 

^  are  foolish  and  hurtful,  and  which  drown  men  in 

10  destruction  and  perdition:  (10)  for  the  Ibveot 
money  is  the  root  of  all  these  evils.  And  there 
are  some  who,  coveting  it,  have  erred  from  the 
£dth,  and  brought  themselves  into  many  sorrow&— 

11  (11^  But  thou,  0  man  of  God,  flee  from  these  things , 
ana  follow  after  righteousness,  and  rectitude,  and 
fidth,    and    love,    and    patience,    and    humilit^jr. 

12  (12)  And  contend  in  the  good  contest  c^  faith ;  and 
lay  hold  of  life  eternal,  to  which  thou  art  called, 
and  [of  which]  thou  hast  confessed  a  good  <^nfe»- 

18  sion  before  many  witnesses.    (18)  I  charge^  thee, 

before  Gbd,  who  quickeneth  all,  and  [before]  Je$us 

;     the  Messiah  who  attested  a  good  testimony  before 

14  Pontius  Pilate,  (14)  that  thou  keep  the  injunction, 
without  stain,  and  without  blemish,  until  tne  mani- 

15  festation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (15)  which^ 
God  wHl,  in  due  time  make  visible ;  [God]  the  bless- 
ed and  only  Potentate,  the  King  of  kings,  and  the 

16  Lord  of  lords ;  (16)  who  only  is  incorruptible,  and 
dwelleth  in  light  to  which  no  one  can  approach ;  and 
whom  no  man  hath  seen,  or  even  can  see :  to  him 
be  glory  and  dominion  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

17  Charge  the  rich  of  this  world,  that  they  be  not 
uplifted  in  their  minds ;  and  that  they  confide  not 
in  riches,  in  which  is  no  security ;  but  in  the  living 
God,  who  giveth  us  all  things  abundantly  for  our 

18  comfort:  (18)  and  that  they  do  gppd  works^  and 
be  rich  in  welMoings;  and  be  ready  to  give  and 


^  Sy.  oup 


•8j.}cnaic 


*  or,  wham. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


386 


2  TIMOTHY,  II. 


to  comnHinicate :  (19)  and  that  they  lay  up  for  19 
themselves  a  good  foundation  for  that  which  is 
future;  that  they  may  take  hold  of  real  life. 

0  Timothy,  be  careful  of  that  which  is  committed  20 
to  thee;  ana  shun  vain  words,  and  the  oppositions 
of  &lse  science :  (21)  for  they  who  profess  it,  have  21 
erred  fh>m  the  &.ith.     Grace  be  with  thee.    Amen. 

End  (^  the  first  Epistle  to  Timothy ;  which  was  written  firom 
Laodicea, 


The  Seeond  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Timothy. 


»  or,  itUvation. 


^  Sf.  wake  up 


or,  saved. 


Paul,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah  by  the  pleas*    I. 
ure  of  God,  according  to  the  promise  of  life*  which 
is  in  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (2)  to  Timothy  a  beloved    2 
son ;  grace,,  and  mercy,  and  peace,  from  God  the 
Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

I  thank  God,  whom  I  serve  from  my  forefathers    8 
with  a  pure  conscience,  that  I  continually  remem- 
ber thee  in  my  prayers,  by  night  and  hj  day: 
(4)  and  I  desire  to  see  thee,  and  I  call  to  mind  thy    4 
tears ;  that  I  may  be  filled  with  joy,  (5)  by  the     5 
recollection  which  I  have,  by  thy  genuine  faith, 
which  dwelt  first  in  thy  grandmother  Lois,  and  in 
thy  mother  Eunice,  and  also,  I  am  persuaded,  in 
thee.— (6)  Wherefore  I  remind  thee,  that  thou  ex-    6 
cite*>  the  gift  of  God,  that  is  in  thee  by  the  imposi- 
tion of  ray  hands.     (7)  For  God  hath  not  given  us     7 
a  spirit  oi  fear,  but  of  energy,  and  of  love,  and  of 
instruction.     (8)  Therefore  be  not  thou  ashamed  of     8 
the  testimony  oi  our  Lord,  nor  of  me  his  prisoner ; 
but  endure  evils  in  connection  with   the  Gospel, 
through  the  power  of  God ;  (9)  who  hath  vivified^     9 
us,  and  called  us  with  a  holy  calling ;  not  accord- 
ing to  our  works,  but  according  to  his  good  pleas- 
ure, and  his  grace  that  was  given  us  in  Jesus  the 
Messiah  from  time  before  the  ages,  (10)  and  is  10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  TIMOTHY,   II. 


387 


now  made  known  by  the  appearing  of  our  Vivifier,* 
Jesus  the  Messiah ;  who  hath  abolished  death,  and 
hath  made  manifest  life  and  immortality,  by  the 

11  gospel:  (11)  of  which  I  am  constituted  a  herald 
and   a    legate,    and    a   teacher  of  the  Gtentiles. 

12  (12)  Therefore  I  suJBfer  these  things :  and  I  am  not 
ashamed ;  for  I  know  in  whom  I  h&ve  believed,  and 
I  am  persuaded  that  he  is  competent  to  keep  for 

18  me  my  deposit  against  that  day.— (13)  Let  the 
form®  of  sound  words,  which  thou  hast  heard  from 
me,  abide  with  thee ;  with  faith  and  love,  in  Jesus 

14  the  Messiah.    (14)  Keep  thou  the  good  deposit,  by 

15  the  Holy  Spirit  who  dwelleth  in  us.-— (15)  This 
thou  knowest,  that  all  those  in  Asia  have  turned 
from  me ;  and  that  among  them  are  Phygellus  and 

16  Hermocenes.  (16)  Mav  our  Lord  bestow  mercy 
on  the  house  of  Onesiphorus ;  for,  many  times,  he 
refreshed  me,  and  was  not  ashamed  of  the  chains 

17  of  my  imprisonment.  (17)  But  also,  when  he  came 
to  ICome,  he  sought  for  me  with  diligence,  and 

18  found  me.  (18)  May  our  Lord  grant  him,  that  he 
may  find  mercy  with  our  Lord,  in  that  dav.  And 
how  he  ministered  to  me  at  Ephesus,  thou  very 
well^  knowest 

n.     Thou  therefore,  my  son,  be  strong  in  the  grace 

2  which  is  by  Jesus  the  Messiah.    ,{2)  And  the  things 

thou  hast  heard  from  me  by  many  witnesses,  these 

commit  thou  to  faithful  men,  who  are  competent  to 

8  teach  others  also.— (3)  And  endure  evils,  as  a  good 

4  soldier  of  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (4)  No  man,  on  be- 
coming a  soldier,  entangleth  himself  with  the  busi* 
ness  of  the  world;  that  he  may  please  him  who  en- 

5  listed^him.  (5)  And  if  one  contend  fin  the  games], 
he  is  not  crowned,  unless  he  contenaeth  according 

6  to  the  niles.     (6)  The  husbandman  who  laboreth, 

7  ought  first  to  feed  on  his  fruits.  (7)  Consider  what 
I  say.     Our  Lord  give  thee  wisdom  in  all  things. 

8  (8)  fee  mindful  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  he  arose 
from  the  dead ;  who  was  of  the  seed  of  David,  ac- 

9  cording  to  my  gospel,  (9)  in  which  I  suffer  evils 
xmto  iSnds,  as  if  an  evil-doer :  but  the  word  of  God 

10  is  not  in  bonds.  (10)  Therefore  I  endure  every 
thing,  for  the  elect's  sake ;  that  they  also  may  ob- 
tain life,^  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  with  eternal  glory. 

11  (11)  Faithful  is  the  saying.  For  if  we  shall  have 


^  or,  Saviour 


Sy.  ISOmi 

pctttem  exem- 
plar. 


'  Sy.  o^uii- 
dandy. 


Sy. 


or, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


888 


2  TIMOTHY,   III. 


Sr.|]Lb 


^  Qr»  may  come 
(otkeircon- 
aciaiuness. 


13 
14 


died  with  him,  we  shall  also  live  with  him ;  (12)  and,  12 
if  MTQ  shall  have  suffered,  we  shall  also  reign  with 
him.     But  if  we  shall  have  rejected  him,  he  will 
reject  us.    (13)  And  if  we  shall  nave  not  believed  in 
him,  he  abideth  in  his  fidelity ;  for  he  cannot  reject 
himself. — (14)  Of  these  things  admonish  thou  them ; 
and  charge  [them,]  before  our  Lord,  that  they  dis- 
pute not,  with  unprofitable  words,  to  the  subversion 
of  those  who  hear  them.    (15)  And  study  to  present  15 
thvself  before  God,  perfectly,  a  laborer  who  is  not 
ashamed,  one  who  correctly  announceth  the  word  of 
truth.  (16)  Avoid  vain  discourses,®  in  which  there  is  16 
no  profit ;  for  thev  very  much  add  to  the  wickedness 
of  those  occupied  with  them.     (17J  And  their  dis-  17 
course,  like  an  eating  cancer,  will  lay  nold  upon  many. 
And  one  of  these  is  Hy  meneus,  and  anotner  Phile- 
tus ;  (18)  who  have  wandered  from  the  truth,  while  18 
they  say,  The  resurrection  of  the  dead  hath  passed : 
and  they  subvert  the  faith  of  some.    (19)  But  the  19 
firm  foundation^  of  God  standeth ;  and  it  hath  this 
seal,  The  Lord  knoweth  them  who  are  his :  and, 
Let  every  one  who  invoketh  the  name  of  our  Lord, 
stand  aloof  from  iniquity.    (20)  But  in  a  ereat 
house,  there  are  not  only  vessels  of  gold  or  silver, 
but  also  of  wood  and  of  pottery ;  and  some  of  them 
for  honor,  and  some  for  dishonor.    (21)  If  there- 
fore any  one  purge  himself  fix)m  these  things,  he 
will  be  a  pure  vessel  for  honor,  fit  for  the  use  of  his 
Lord,  and  prepared  for  every  good  work. — (22)  Fly 
fix)m  all  the  lusts  of  youth;  and  follow  after  righ- 
teousness, and  faith,  and  love,  and  peace,  with  them 
that  invoke  our  Lord  with  a  pure  heart.    (23)  Avoid  28 
those  foolish  discussions  wnich  afibrd  no  instruc- 
tion; for  thou  knowest,  that  they  generate  contests. 
(24)  And  a  servant  of  our  Lord  ought  not  to  con* 


20 


21 


22 


24 
26 


tend,  but  to  be  mild  towards  every  one,  and  in- 
structive, and  patient ;  (25)  that  with  mildness  he 
may  enlighten  those  who  dispute  against  him,  if 
perhaps  God  may  give  them  repentance,  and  they 
may  acknowledge  the  truth,  (26)  and  may  recollect  26 
themselves,®  and  may  escape  out  of  the  snare  of  Sa- 
tan, at  whose  pleasure  they  have  been  held  ensnare! 

But  this  know  thou,  that  in  the  latter  days  hardm 
•times  will  come:  (2)  and  men  will  be  lovers  of  2 
I  themselves,  and  lovers  of  money,  boasters,  proud, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  TIMOTHY,   IV, 


389 


9 
10 


censorious,  unyielding  towards  their  own  people, 
8  denjers  of  grace,  wicked,  (3)  calumniators,  addict- 
ed to  concupiscence,  ferocious,  haters  of  the  good, 

4  (4)  treacherous,  rash,  inflated,  attached  to  pleasure 

5  more  than  to  the  love  of  God,  (5)  having  a  form* 
of  respect  for  God,  but  wide  from  the  power  of  <jod. 

6  Them  who  are  such,  repel  from  thee.  (6)  For  of 
them  are  they  who  creep  into  this  and  that  house, 
and  captivate  the  women  who  are  plunged  in  sins 

7  and  led  away  by  divers  lusts,  (7)  who  are  always 
learning,  and  can  never  come  to  the  knowledge  of 

-8  the  truth.  (8)  Now  as  Jannes  and  Jambres  with- 
stood Moses,  so  also  do  these  withstand  the  truth: 
men  whose  mind  is  corrupted,  and  [they]  repro- 
bates from  the  faith.  (9)  feut  they  will  not  make 
progress,  for  their  infatuation  will  be  understood  by 
every  one,  as  theirs  also  was  understood. — (10)  But 
thou  hast  followed  after  my  doctrine,  and  my  man- 
ner of  life,  and  my  aims,  and  my  faith,  and  my 
long  suffering,   and  my  love,   and  my  patience,! 

11  (11)  and  my  persecution,  and  my  sufferings.  And 
thou  knowest  what  I  endured  at  Antioch,  and  at 
Iconium,  and  at  Lvstra;  what  persecution  I  en- 
dured :  and  from  all  these  my  Lord  delivered  me. 

12  (12)  And  likewise  all,  who  choose  to  live  in  the 
fear  of  God,  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  will  be  perse- 
cuted. (13)  But  evil  and  seducing  men  will  add 
to  their  wickedness,  while  they  deceive  and  are  de- 
ceived. (14)  But  continue  thou  in  the  things  thou 
hast  learned  and  been  assured  of;  for  thou  knowest 

15  from  whom  thou  leamedst ;  (15)  because  from  thy 
childhood,  thou  wast  taught  the  holy  books,  which 
can  make  thee  wise  unto  life,^  by  faith  in  Jesus  the 

16  Messiah.— (16)  All  scripture  that  was  written  by 
the  Spirit,  is  profitable  K)r  instruction,  and  for  con- 
futation, and  for  correction,  and  for  erudition  in 

17  righteousness ;  (17)  that  the  man  of  God  may  be- 
come perfect,  and  complete  for  every  good  work.^ — 

IV.(IV.)  I  charge  thee,  before  God,  and  our  Lord  Je- 
sus the  Messiah,  who  is  to  judge  the  living  and  the 
2  dead,  at  the  manifestation  of  his  kingdom,  (2)  Pro- 
claim the  word ;  and  persist  [in  it]  with  diligence, 
in  time  and  out  of  time  ;*  admonish,  and  rebuke, 

8  with  all  patience  and  instructiveness.  (3)  For  the 
time  will  come,  when  they  will  not  give  ear  to 
sound  teaching;  but,  according  to  their  lusts,  will 


13 


14 


'  Sy. 

Gr.  f4.op^6i)(f/« 


^  or,  salvation. 


i.  e.  at  regulca 
times,  and 
times  not 
regular. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


390 


a  TIMOTHY,    IV. 


or,  tuppearing. 


Bjr.|2o|o>r) 


multiplj  to  themselves  teachers,  in  the  itching  of 
their  nearing ;  (4)  and  will  turn  away  their  ears    4 
from  the  truSi,  and  incline  after  fables.    (5)  But  be    5 
thou  vigilant  in  all  things ;  and  endure  evils,  and 
do  the  work  of  an  evangelist,  *»  and  fulfill  thy  minis- 
try.—(6)  But  I  am  soon  to  be  immolated ;  and  the     6 
time  of  my  dissolution  hath  come.    (7)  I  have    7 
fought  a  good  combat,  I  have  completed  my  race, 
I  have  preserved  my  fidelity ;  (8)  and  henceforth    8 
there  is  preserved  for  me  a  crown  of  righteousness, 
with  which  my  Lord,  the  righteous  Judge,  will  re- 
compense me  in  that  day ;  and  not  me  only,  but 
them  also  who  love  his  manifestation.® 

Exert  thyself  to  come  to  me  quickly.    (10)  For    9 
Demas  hath  left  me ;  and  hath  loved  this  world,  10 
and  gone  away  to  Thessalonica ;  Crispus  to  Ghda- 
tia,  Titus  to  Dalmatia.    (11)  Luke  only  is  with  me.  11 
Take  Mark,  and  bring  him  with  thee;  for  he  is 
suitable  for  me,  for  ministration.    (12)  And  Tych-  12 
icus  I  have  sent  to  Ephesus.    (13)  And  when  thou  13 
comest,  bring  the  bookcase,  which  I  left  at  Troas 
with  Carpus,  and  the  books,  but  especially  the  roll 
of  parchments.— (14J  Alexander  the  coppersmith  14 
showed  me  many  ills:  our  Lord  will  reward  him 
according  to  his  doings.    (15)  And  do  thou  also  15 
beware  of  him ;  for  he  is  very  insolent  against  our 
words. — (16)  At  my  first  defence,  no  one  was  with  16 
me,  but  they  all  forsook  me.    Let  not  this  be  reck- 
oned to  them.    (17)  But  my  Lord  stood  by  me,  17 
and  strengthened  me ;  that  by  me  the  preaching^* 
might  be  fulfilled ;  and  [that]  all  the  Gentiles  might 
hear:  and  I  was  rescued  from  the  mouth  of  the  lion. 
(18)  And  my  Lord  will  rescue  me  from  every  evil  18 
work ;  and  will  give  me  life  in  his  heavenly  king- 
dom.— To  him  be  glory,  for  ever  and  ever.  Amen. 

Present  a  salutation  to  Priscilla  and  Aquila,  and  19 
to  the  household  of  Onesiphorus.      (20)  Erastus  20 
hath  stopped  at  Corinth ;  and  Trophimus  1  left  sick 
at  the  citj  of  Miletua    (21^  Exert  thyself  to  come  21 
before  winter. — Eubulus  saluteth  thee,  and  Pudens, 
and  Linus,  and  Claudia,  and  all  the  brethren. — 
f22)  Our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  be  with  thy  spirit.  22 
Grace  be  with  thee.     Amen. 

End  of  the  Second  Epistle  to  Timothy;  which  loas  written 
frvm  Rofne, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Titos. 


L  Paul,  a  servant  of  God,  and  a  legate  of  Jesus 
the  Messiah;  according  to  the  faith  of  the  elect  of 
God,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  truth  which  is  in 

2  the  fear  of  God,  (2)  concerning  the  hope  of  eternal 
life,  which  the  veracious  God  promised  before  the 

8  times  of  the  world;*  (8)  and  in  due  time  he  hath 
manifested  his  word,  bv  means  of  our  announce- 
ment, which  was  confided  to  me  by  the  command 

4  of  God  our  life-giver  ;*>  (4)  to  Titus,  a  real  son 
after  the  common  faith: — Grace  and  peace  from 
God  our  Father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah, our  Life-giver.c 

5  For  this  cause  left  I  thee  in  Crete,  that  thou 
mightest  regulate  the  things  deficient,  and  establish 

6  elders*^  in  every  city,  as  I  directed  thee:  (6)  him, 
who  is  blameless,  who  is  the  husband  of  one  wife, 
and  hath  believing  children,  who  are  no  revellers, 

7  nor  ungovernable  in  sensuality.  (7)  For  an  elder® 
ought  to  be  blameless,  as  the  steward  of  God ;  and 
not  be  self-willed,  nor  irascible,  nor  excessive  in 
wine,  nor  with  hands  swift  to  strike,  nor  a  lover  of 

8  base  gains.  (8)  But  he  should  be  a  lover  of  stran- 
gers, and  a  lover  of  good  [deeds],  and  be  sober, 
upright,  kind-hearted,  and  restraining  himself  from 

9  evil  passions;  (9)  and  studious  of  the  doctrine  of 
the  word  of  faith,  that  he  may  be  able  by  his 
wholesome  teaching  both  to  console,  and  to  rebuke 
them  that  are  contentious. — (10)  For  many  are  un 
submissive,  and  their  discourses  vain;  and  they 
mislead  the  minds  of  people,  especially  such  as  are 
of  the  circumcision.  (11)  The  mouth  of  these 
ought  to  be  stopped :  they  corrupt  many  families  ;^ 
and  they  teach  what  they  ought  not,  tor  the  sake 
of  base  gains.  (12)  One  of  them,  a  prophetK  of 
their  own,  said.  The  Cretans  are  always  menda- 

18  cious,  evil  beasts,  idle  bellies.    (13)  And  this  tes- 


•  Sy.  ]lQ^ 

•>  or,  Saviour. 
Gr.  <f Gjr^p. 

•  or,  Saviour. 
^Sy.yiioZo 


10 


11 


12 


Sy.| 


'  Sy.  houses, 
»  Sy.  ^xiDJ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


392 


»Sy.)^JLA^ 


^  Or.  Savinur. 


^  Of.  Savtour, 


TITUS,   IL 

timony  is  true.    Therefore  chide  them  sharplj; 
that  they  may  be  sound  in  the  faith,  (14)  and  may  14 
not  throw  themselves  into  Jewish  fables,  and  into 
the  precepts  of  men  who  hate  the  truth.     (15)  For  15 
to  the^pure,  every  thing  is  pure ;  but  to  them  who 
are  denied  and  unbelieving,  nothing  is  pure ;  but 
their  xmderstanding  is  defiled,  and  their  conscience. 
(16)  Arid  th^y  pi*6f6ss  that  they  know  God,  but  in  16 
their  works  fliey  deny  him;  and  they  are  odious, 
and  disobedient,  and^4o  every  good  work  repro- 
bates. 

But  speak  thou  the  things  that  belong  to  whole*  II. 
some  doctrine.    (2)  And  teach  the  older  men*  to     2 
be  watchfiil  in  their  minds,  and  to  be  sober,  and  to 
be  pure,  and  to  be  sound  in  the  faith,  and  in  love, 
ana  in  patience.    (8)  And  so  also  the  elder  wom-    8 
en,'>  that  they  be  in  behavior  as  becometh  the 
fear  of  God ;  and  not  to  be  slanderers ;  and  not  to 
be  addicted  to  much  wine;  and  to  be  inculcators  of 
good  things,  (4)  making  the  younger  women  to  be    4 
modest,  to  love  their  husbands  and  their  children, 
(5)  to  be  chaste  and  holy,  and  to  take  good  care  of    5 
their  households,  and  to  be  obedient  to  their  hus- 
bands ;  so  that  no  one  may  reproach  the  word  of 
God.— (6)  And  likewise  exhort  younff  men  to  be    6 
sober.    (7)  And  in  every  thing  snow  myself  a  pat-    7 
tern,  as  to  all  good  works:  and  in  thy  teaching,  let 
thy  discourse  be  healthfiil,  (8)  such  as  is  sober  and    8 
uncorrupt ;  and  let  no  one  despise  it :  so  that  he 
who  riseth  up  against  us,  may  be  ashamed,  seeing 
he  can  say  nothing  odious  against  us. — (9)  Let  ser-    9 
vants  obey  their  masters  in  every  thing,  and  strive 
to  please  them,  and  not  contradict,   nor  pilfer; 
(10)  but  let  them  manifest  that  their  fidelity,  in  all  10 
respects,  is  good :  so  that  they  may  adorn  the  doc- 
trine of  God  our  life-giver,  <^  in  all  things. — (11)  For  11 
the  all- vivifying  grace  of  God,  is  revealed  to  all 
men;  (12)  and  it  teacheth  us,  to  deny  ungodliness  12 
and  worldly  lusts,  and  to  live  in  this  world  in  so- 
briety, and  in  uprightness,  and  in  the  fear  of  God, 
(18)  looking  for  the  blessed  hope,  and  the  manifes-  13 
tation  of  the  glory  of  the  great  God,  and  our  life- 
giyer,^  Jesus  the  Messiah;  (14)  who  gave  himself  14 
tor  us,  that  he  might  recover  us  fix)m  all  iniquity, 
and  purify  for  himself  a  new  people,  who  are  zeal- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


TITUS,   I   L 


898 


4 
5 


16  ous  in  good  works.  (15)  These  things  speak  thou, 
and  exhort,  and  inculcate,  with  all  authority;®  and 
let  no  one  despise  thee. 

m.    And  admonish  them  to  be  submissive-and  obe- 
dient to  princes  and  potentates;  and  that  they  be 
2  ready  for  every  good  work;  (2)  and  that  they 
speat  ill  of  no  man ;  that  they  be  not  contentious, 
but  mild ;  and  that  in  every  thing'  they  manifest 

8  benignity  towards  all  men.— (8)  For  we  also  were 
formerly  reckless,  and  disobedient,  and  erring,  and 
serving  divers  lusts,  and  living  in  malice  and  envy, 
and  were  hateful  and  also  hating  one  another. 
(4)  But  when  the  kindness  and  compassion  of  God 
our  Life-giver*  was  revealed,  (5)  not  by  works  of 
righteousness  which  we  had  done,  but  according 
to  his  mercy,  he  vivified^  us,  by  the  washing  of  the 
new  birth,  and  by  the  renovation  of  the  Holy  Spir- 

.  6  it,  (6)  which  he  shed  on  us  abundantly,  hj  Jesus 
7  the  Messiah  our  Life-giver  :<^  (7)  that  we  might  be 

i'ustified^  by  his  grace,  and  becqme  heirs  in  the 
ope  of  eternal  life. — (8)  Faithful  is  the  word:  and 
in  these  things,  I  would  have  thee  also  establish 
them ;  so  that  they,  who  have  believed  in  God,  may 
be  careful  to  cultivate  good  works:  these  are  the 
things,  which  are  good,  and   profitable  to  men. 

9  (9)  But  foolish  questions,  and  stories  of  genealo- 
gies, and  the  disputes  and  contests  of  the  scribes, 
avoid :  for  there  is  no  profit  in  them,  and  they  are 

10  vain.     (10)  An  heretical®  man,  after  thou  hast  in- 

11  structed  him  once  and  again,  avoid:  (11)  and 
know  thou,  that  such  a  man  is  perverse,  and  sinful, 
and  self-condemned. 

12  When  I  shall  send  Artemas  to  thee,  or  Tychicus, 
strive  thou  to  come  to  me  at  Nicopolis ;  for  I  have 

18  purposed  to  winter  there.  (13)  As  for  Zenas  the 
scribe,  and  Apollos,  endeavor  to  help  them  well  on 

14  their  way,  that  they  may  want  nothing.  (14)  And 
let  our  people  learn  also  to  perform  good  works,  on 
occasions  of  emergency,  that  they  may  not  be  un- 

15  fruitful— (15)  All  they  that  are  with  me  salute 
•    thee.     Salute  all  them  who  love  us  in  ihe  faith. — 

Grace  be  with  you  all.    Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  Titus ;  which  was  wnUenfrom  Nicop- 
olis, and  IMS  sent  by  the  hajtds  of  Zenas  and  Apollos, 


•  Sy.     .r>ngi 


*  Gr.  Savwur. 

^  or,  saved. 

'  Gr.  Savicur, 
-  Sy.  ^>>p 


•  Sy. 
Gr.  ^ipfiTueofi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Epistle  of  Paul  to  Philemoik 


8y. 


*  Sy.  beteeoking 
Ibeteeeh, 


Paul,  a  prisoner  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and 
Timothy  a  brother ;— to  the  beloved  Philemon,  a 
laborer  with  us,  {2)  and  to  our  beloved  Apphia,  and 
to  Archippus  a  laoorer  with  us,  and  to  tne  church 
in  thy  house. — (8)  Grace  be  with  you,  and  peace 
fix>m  God  our  father,  and  from  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah. 

I  thank  my  Gxxl  always,  and  remember  thee  in 
my  prayers,  (5)  lo,  from  the  time  that  I  heard  of 
thy  faith,  and  of  the  love  thou  hast  towards  our 
Lord  Jesus,  and  towards  all  the  saints ;  (6)  that  there 
may  be  a  fellowships  of  thy  faith,  vielaing  fruits  in 
works,  and  in  the  knowledge  of  au  the  good  things 
ye  possess  in  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (7)  For  we  have 
great  joy  and  consolation,  because  the  bowels  of  the 
saints  are  refreshed  by  thjr  love. — (8)  Therefore  I 
might  have  great  freedom  m  the  Messiah,  to  enjoin 
upon  thee  tne  things  that  are  right.  (9)  But  for 
love's  sake,  I  earnestly  beseech**  thee — even  I,  Paul, 
who  am  aged,  as  thou  knowest,  and  now  also  a 
prisoner  for  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (10)  I  beseech  thee 
for  my  son,  whom  I  had  begotten  in  my  bonds — ^for 
Onesimus;  (11)  from  whom  formerly  thou  hadst 
no  profit,  but  now  very  profitable  will  he  be  both 
to  thee  and  to  me ;  and  whom  I  have  sent  to  thee. 
(12^  And  receive  thou  him,  as  one  begotten  by  me. 
(18)  For  I  was  desirous  to  retain  him  with  me,  that  13 
he  might  minister  to  me  in  thy  stead,  in  these  bonds 
for  the  gospel.  (14)  But  I  would  do  nothing  with-  14 
out  consulting  thee ;  lest  thy  benefit  should  be  as 
if  by  compulsion,  and  not  with  thy  pleasure. — (15)  15 
And,  perhaps,  also,  he  therefore  departed  from  thee  • 
for  a  season,  that  thou  mightest  retain  him  for  ever ; 
(16)  henceforth,  not  as  a  servant,  but  more  than  a  16 
servant,  a  brother  dear  to  me,  and  much  more  to 
thee,  both  in  the  flesh  and  in  our  Lord  ?    (17)  If  17 


8 


10 
11 


12 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,    I. 


896 


therefore  thou  art  in  fellowship®  with  me,  receive  him 

18  as  one  of  mine.     (18)  And  if  he  hath  wronged  thee, 

19  or  oweth  thee  aught,  place  it  to  my  account.  (19) 
I,  Paul,  have  written  [it]  with  my  own  hand,  I  will 
repay  : — not  to  say  to  thee,  that  to  me  thou  owest 

20  thy  ownself.  (20)  Yes,  my  brother,  let  me  be  re- 
freshed by  thee  in  our  Lord :   refresh  thou  my 

21  bowels  in  the  Messiah.  (21)  Being  confident  that 
thou  wilt  hearken  to  me,  I  have  written  to  thee : 
and  I  know  that  thou  wilt  do  more  than  I  say. 

22  And  herewith,  prepare  also  a  house  for  me  to 
lodge  in  ;  for  I  hope  that,  by  your  pravers,  I  shall 

23  be  given  to  you.    (28)  Epaphras,  a  fellow-captive 

24  with  me  in  tfesus  the  Messiah,  saluteth  thee ;  (24) 
and  Mark,  and  Aristarchus,  and  Demas,  and  Luke, 

26  my  coadjutors. — (25)  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus 
the  Messiah  be  witn  your  spirit,  my  brethren. — 
Amen. 

End  of  ike  Epistle  to  Philemon ;    which  was  written  from 
Rome^  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Onesimus, 


Sy.  ]aZ. 


♦  'Ulr:^    Lq^j    14^ 

The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews. 


L      In  many  jsr^y^  and  many  forms,  God_ancientlx 

2  conversed  with  our  fathers,  by  the  prophets :  (2) 
But  in  these  latter-days,  he  hath  conversed  with  us, 
by  his  Son ;  whom  he  hath  constituted  heir  of  all 

8  things,  and  by  whom  he  made  the  worlds ;»  (8)  who 
is  the  splendor  of  his  glory,  and  the  image  .of  him* 

■■oel^^  and  upholdeth  all  by  the  energy  of  his  word ; 

and  by  himself  he  made  a  purgation  of  sins,  and 

sat  down  on  the  right  hand  of  the  Majestvon  high. 

9  ^ff^    4  (4)  And  he  is  altogether  superior  to  the  angels,  as 

he  hath  also*inlierited  a  name  which  excelleth  theirs. 

5  (5)  For  to  which  of  the  angels  did  God  ever  say, 
Thou  art  my  Son,  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee  ? 
And  again,  I  will  De  to  him  a  Father,  and  he  shall 

6  be  to  me  a  Son  ?   (6)  And  agam,  when  bringing  the 


Sy.  ]LqXl 

of  his  Being, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


396 


HEBREWS,   II. 


r      ■  '         i  ^        i 

I 


/ ,  ^\(^i,'  "^  Qt.  itAvaium, 


first  begotten  into  the  world,  he  said :  Let  all  the 
angels  of  God  worship  him.    (7)  But  of  the  angels    7 
he  thus  said: — Who  made   his  angels   a  windy ^ 
and  his  ministers  a  flaming  fire.   (8)  But  of  the  Son    8 
he  said :  Thy  throne,  0  God,  is  for  ever  and  ever ;  a 
righteous*'  sceptre  is  the  sceptre  of  thy  kingdom. 
(9)  Thou  hast  loved  rectitude,  and  hated  iniquitv;     9 
therefore  God,  thy  God,  hath  anointed  thee  witn  the 
oil  of  gladness  more  than  thy  associates.     (10)  And  10 
again.  Thou  hast  firom  the  beginning  laid  the  foun- 
dations of  the  earth,  and  t^fiEeavens  are  the  work 
of  thy  hands:    (11)  they  (mly  pass  away,  but  thou  11 
endurest;  and  they  all,  liEea  robe,  wax  old;  (12)  12 
and  like  a  cloak,  thou  wilt  fold  them  up.     They 
jwilLbe  changed ;  but  thou  wilt  be  as  thou  art,  and 
thy  years^will  not  be  fiaiabM. — (13)  And  to  which  18 
of  the  angels^IdTTe  ever  say : — Sit  thou  at  my  right 
hand,  until  I  shall  place  thy  enemies  a  footstool 
under  thy  feet?      (14)  Are  they  not  all  spirits  of  14 
ministration,  who  are  sent  to  minister  on  account  of 
them  that  are  to  inherit  life?® 


*  Gr.  salvation. 


b  Sy. 


Therefore  we  ought  to  be  exceedingly  cautious,  IL 
in  regard  to  what  we  have  heard,  lest  we  fall  away. 
(2)  For  if  the  word  uttered  by  the  medium  of  angels    2 
was  confirmed,  and  every  one  who  heard  it,  and 
transgressed  it,  received  a  just  retribution  ;  (8)  how    8 
shall  we  escape,  if  we  deapiaft  the  things  which  are 
our  life,*  things  which  began  to  be  spoken  bv  our 
Lord,  and  were  confirmed  to  us  by  them  who  heard 
from  him,  (4)  while  God  gave  testimony  concerning    4 
them,'  by  signs  and  wonders,  and  by  various  mir- 
acles and  dogtributions  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  which 
were  given  according  to  his  pleasure  ? — (5)  FottxT 
the  angels  he  hath  not  subjectedjbheworld  to_come,*» 
of  which  we  speak.     (6)  But  as  the  scripture  testi- 
fieth,  and  saith : — ^What  is  man,  that  thou  j^rLmindful 
of  him?  and  the  son  of  man,  that  thou  attendest'toS 
him?      (7)   Thou   hast   depressed  bim   somewhat _ 
lower  than  the  angels :  glory  and  honor  hast  thou 
put  on  his  head;C4nd  thou  hast  invested  him  with 
authority  over  the  work  of  thy  hand?])  (8)  And  all 
things  hast  thou  subjected  under  bis  feet.     And  in 
this  subjecting  of  all  things  to  him,  he  omitted  noth- 
ing, which  he  did  not  subject.     But  now,  we  do  not 
yet  see  all  things  subjected  to  him.     (9)  But  we  see 


J3 


le 


HEBREWS,   III. 


397 


liiin,  who  was  depressed  somewhat  lower  than  the 
angels,  to  be  this  Jesus,  because  q£  the  passion  of 
his  death ;  and  glory  and  honor^p  placed  on  his 
head ;  ^fiir.JlQihinas§J^  in  his  grace,*  tasted  death 

10  for  all  men.  (10)  For  it  became  him,  by^Khoci  are 
all  things,  and  on  account  of  whom  are  all  things, 
and  [who]  br^pgeth  many  sons  unto  his  glory,  to 

11  perfect  the  prince  of  their  life^  by  suffering.  (11) 
For  he  that  sanctifieth,  and  they  who  are  sanctified, 
are  all  of  one  [nature].  Therefore  he  is  not  ashamed 

12  to  calTThem  brethren;  (12)  as  he  saith,  I  will 
announce  thy  name  to  my  brethren ;  in  the  midst  of 

18  the  assembly, ^^  I  will  praise  thee.  (18)  And  again, 
I  will  confide  in  him.     And  again.  Behold  me,  and 


14 


15 

16 


the  children  whom  thou,  God,  hast  given  to  me. 

(14)  For;  because  the  children  participat€(d^  in  flesh 
and  blood,  he  also,  in  like  manner,  took  part  in  the 
same;  that,  by  his  death,  he  might  bring  to  naught 
him  who  held  the  dominion  of  death,  namely  Satan ; 

(15)  and  might  release  them,  who,  through  fear  of 
death,  are  all  their  lives  subject  to  bondage.  (16) 
For  he  did  not  assume  [a  nature]  from  angels,  but 
he  assumed  [a  nature]  from  the  seed  of  Abraham, 

17  (17)  Wherefore  it  was  right,  that  he  should  be  in  all 
respects  like  his  brethren ;  that  he  might  be  merci- 
ful, and  a  high  priest^  faithful  in  the  things  of  God, 
and  might  ^ake  expiation  for  the  sins  of  the  peo- 

18  pie.  (18)  For,  in  that  he  himself  hath  suffered^  and 
been  tempted,  he  is  able  to  succor  them  who  are 
tempted. 

IIL    Wherefore,  my  holy  brethren,  who  are  called  with 

a  calling  that  is  from  heaven,  consider  this  Legate* 

and  High  Priest**  of   our  profession,   Jesus  the 

2  Messiah :   (2)  who  was  faithful  to  him  that  made 

8  him,  as  was  Moses  in  all  his  house.     (3)  For  much 

greater  is  the  glory  of  this  man,  than  that  of  Moses; 

just  as  the  glory  of  the  builder  of  a  house,  is  greater 

4  than  that  of  the  edifice.    (4)_For  every  house  is 

.JbuiltJbjLaome  man ;  but  he  wno^  bmlde^hjilT  things^ 

6  is  God.     (5)  And  Moses,  as  a  servant,  wasTaithml 

m  all  the  house,  for  an  attestation  to  those  things 


A^n-." 


^  I.  V*    iAJt- 


i'VTJ 


■  Gr.  salvation. 


O".^ 


,-^  ->v,  , 


>^4  ^ 


*  So  the  Jacobite  eopies  read ;  but  the  Nestorian  eopies  read,  But  he,  apart 
Jrom  Ood,  tasted,  tfc.  The  Greek  is,  5^u)g  x*P*'''  ^^^^  •  •  *  y*"^*^«^  ^-  1>^^ 
flome  eopies  haye,  6^oi€  Xwp^V  ®sou,  4lw. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


398 


HEBREWS,   IV.' 


)^     «  Sjr.  ihowmg 
d  By.  Jktf  \ofp^^ 


A 


'  Sy.)SllA^ 


]in\oSn 


■tr 

that  were  to  be  spoken  by  him :  (6)  but  the  Messiah,     6 
as  the  Son,  [is]  over  his  own  house ;  and  we  are  his 
house,  if  we  retain! 


8 


^£3t 


Iteiumph  of  hope 
iSpiritEath  said •  ^ ,      ^ 

(8)  harden  not  your  hewlB  to  anger  him,  like  the 
provocators,  and  as  in  the  day  of  temptation  in  the 
wilderness,  (9)  when  your  fathers  tempted  me,  and    9 
proved,   [and]  saw  my  works  forty  years.     (lOJ  10 
Therefore  I  was  disgusted  with  that  generation,  ana 
said : — ^This  is  a  people,  whose  heart  wandereth,  and 
they  have  not  known  my  ways :  (11)  so  that  I  swore  11 
in  my  wrath,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  my 
rest.     (12)    Beware,  therefore,  my  brethren,  lest  12 
there  be  in  any  of  vou  an  evil  heart  that  believeth 
not,  and  ye  depart  from  Jhe^  living  God.    (18)  But  13 
examine  yourselves  all  the  days,  ^uHng^  the  day 
which  is  called  to-day ;  ^^d  let  npn^  of^ 
hardened,  through  the  deceitfulness  of  sin.^i4)  For  14 
we  have  part  with  the  Messiah,  if  we  persevere  in 
this  firm  confidence,®  from  the  beginning  to  the 
end :  (15)^  it  is  said.  To-day,  if  ye  will  hear  his  16 
voice,  harden  not  your  hearts,  to  anger  him.     (16J  16 

who  were  they  that  heard,  and  angered  himr 
It  was  not  all  they,  who  came  out  of  Egypt  under 
Moses.     (17)   And  with  whom  was  he  disgusted  17 
forty  yeara,  but  with  those  who  sinned,  and  whose 
carcasses  fell  in  the  wilderness  ?    (18)  and  of  whom  18 
swore  he,  that  they  should  not  enter  into  his  rest^ 
but  of  those  who  believed  not  ?    (19)  So  we  see  that  19 
they  could  not  enter,  because' they  believed  not. — 
(IV.)  Let  us  fear,  therefore,  lest  while  there  is  a  IV. 
firm  promise"  of  entering  into  his  rest,  any  among 
you  should  be  found  coming  short  of  entering. 
(2)   For  to  us  also  is  the  announcement,  as  well  as     2 
to  them :  but  the  word  they  heard  did  not  profit 
them,  because  it  was  not  mingled  with  the  faith  of 
those  who  heard  it.     (3)  But  we,  who  have  believed,     3 
do  enter  into  rest.    But  as  he  said,  As  I  have  sworn 
in  my  wrath,  that  they  shall  not  enter  into  my  rest : 
for  lo,  the  works  of  God  existed  from  the  founda- 
tion of  the  world.     (4)  As  he  said  of  the  sabbath,     4 
God  rested  on  the  seventh  day  from  all  his  works. 
([5)  And  here  again,  he  said,  They  shall  not  enter     5 
into  my  rest,     (6)  Therefore,  because  there  was  a     6 
place,  whither  one  and  another  might  enter ;  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,    V. 


399 


those  earlier  persons,  to  whom  the  announcement 
was  made,  entered  not,  because  they  believed  not : — 

7  (7)  again  he  established  another  day,  a  long  time 
afterwards ;  as  above  written,  that  David  said,  To- 
day, if  ye  will  hear  his  voice,  harden  not  your 

8  hearts.  (8)  For  if  Joshua, *>  the  son  of  Nun^bad. 
given  them  rest,  he  would  not  have  spoken  ^fter- 

9  wards  of  another  day.     (9)  y^erefore  it  is  e^^T;)- 
^  liahedy  that  t\^^,  people  of  6od  are  to  have  a  sab- 

10  bath.c  (10)  For  he  wholiad  entered  into  his  resC 
iiath  aiso  rested  from  his  works,  as  God  did  from 

11  his.  (11)  Let  us,  therefore,  strive  to  enter  ijato 
that  rest;  lest  we  fall  short,  after  the  manner  of 

12  them  who  believed  not  (12)  For  the  word  of  God 
is  living,  and  all-efficient,  and  sharper  than  a  two- 
edged  sword,  and  entereth  even  to  the  severance  of 
the  soul  and  the  spirit,  and  of  the  joints  and  the 
marrow  and  the  bones,  and  judgeth  the  thoughts 

18  and  reasonings  of  the  heart :  (18)  neither  is  there 
any  creature,  which  is  concealed  from  before  him ; 
but  every  thing  is  naked  and  manifest  before  his 
eyes,  to  whom  we  are  to  give  account.  ^^ 

14  Seeing  then  that  we  have  a  great  High  Priest,^ 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  the  son  of  God,  who  hath  as- 
cended to  heaven;  let  us  persevere  in  professing 

16  him.  (15)  For  we  have  not  a  high  priest,  who 
cannot  sympathize  with  our  infirmity;  but  [one] 
who  was  tempted  in   all  respects  like  us,  aside 

16  from  sin. — (16)  Let  us,  therefore,  approach  with 
assurance^  to  the  throne  of  his  grace,  that  we  may 
obtain  mercy,  and  may  find  grace  for  assistance  in 

V,  the  time  of  affliction. — (V.)  For  every  high  priest,* 
who  is  from  among  men,  is  established  over  the 
things  of  God,  in  behalf  of  men,  that  he  may  pre- 
2  sent^the  offering  and  the  sacrifices  for  sin :  (2)  and 
he  can  humble  himself,  and  sympathize  with  the 
ignorant  and  the  erring,  because  he  also  is  clothed 
8  with  infirmity.  (8)  And,  therefore,  he  is  obliged  as 
for  the  people,  so  also  for  himself,  to  present  an  of- 

4  fering  ror  nis  sins.— (4)  _And  no  one  taketh  this 
honor  on  himself  but  he  wlio  is  called  of  God,  as 

5  Aaron  [was].  (5)  So  also  the  Messiah  did  not  ex- 
alt himself  to  become  a  High  Priest ;  but  He  [ap- 
pointed him]  who  said  to  him.  Thou  art  my  Son ; 

6  this  day  have  I  begotten  thee.  (6)  As  he  said  also 
in  another  place :  Thou  art  a  priest**  for  ever,  after 


Jesus, 


d*-.,,. 


•  or,  a  fest. 


•  Sy.  with  cpm 
counterumes. 


Sy.  l^lOQS 


Digitized  by 


Google 


400 


HEBREWS,   VI. 


-tt-Jt  ^, 


*  Hy.  a  time. 
«  Sy.  w^5j 


^^  Qr.  Tou^  olflrag 


the  likeness  of  Melchisedec.    (7)  Likewise,  when  he     7 
was  clothed  in  flesh,  he  presented  supplication  and 
entreaty  with  intense  invocation,  ana  with  tears,  to 
him  who  was  able  to  resuscitate  him  from  deatU ; 
and  he  was  heard.    (8)  And  though  he  was  a  son,     8 

iret,  JFrom  the  fear  and  the  suflerings  he  endiSeS,  he 
^   , earned  obedience.    (9)  And  thus  he  was  perfected    9 

and  became  tiie  cause®  of  eternal  life^  to  all  them 
d  Or.  aalvatim.  who  obey  him.    (10),  And  he  was  named  of  Gbd,  10 
the  High  Priest  im»r  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec. 

Now,  concerning  thia  person,  Melchisedec,  we  11 
have  much  discourse,  which  we  might  utter ;  but  it 
is  difficult  to  explain  it,  because  ye  are  infirm  in 
-^^yout.  hearing^.)  (12)  For  ye  ought  to  be  teachers,  12 
seeing  ye  have  been  long«  in  the  doctrine.  But  now, 
ye  need  to  learn  again  the  first  lines^  of  the  com- 
mencement? of  the  oracles  of  God :  and  ye  have 
need  of  milk,  and  not  of  strong  food.   (18)  For  every  18 
one  whose  food  is  milkj  is  unversed  in  the  language 
of  righteousness,  because  he  is  -a  child.    (14)  But  14 
strong  food  belongeth  to  the  mature  who,  being  in- 
vestigators, have  trained  their  feculties  to  discrimi-' 
nategood  and  evil. — (VI.)  Therefore  let  us  leave  Yl; 
the  commencement*  of  the  word  of  the  Messiah,  and 
let  us  proceed  to  the  completion.^     Or  will  ye 
again  lay  another  foundation  for  the  repentance 
which  is  from  dead  works,  and  for  the  feith  in  God, 
(2)  and  for  the  doctrine  ofbaptisiga,  and  for  the  Jay--   ^  j/*? 


ing.Qn  of  a  hand,  ana  for  the  resurrection  from  th^^ 
dead,  and  for  the  eternal  judgment  ?  (3)  We  will 
do  this,  if  the  Lord  permit.— (4)  But  they  who  have 
once  descended  to  baptism, «  and  have  tasted  the  gift 
from  heaven,  and  have  received  the  Holy  Spirit, 
(5)  and  have  tasted  the  good  word  of  God,  and  the 
pjower  of  the  world  to  come,— ($)^  cannot  agsdn 
sin,  and  a  second  time  be  renewed  to  repentance ; 


^  / 


or  a  second  time  crucify  and  insult  the  Son  of  God. 
(7)  For  the  earth  that  drinketh  the  rain  which 
Cometh  often  upon  it,  and "  produceth  the  herb 
that  is  of  use  to  those  for  whom  it  is  cultivated,  re- 
ceiveth  a  blessing  from  God.  (8)  But'  if  it  shbuld 
put  forth  thorns  and  briers,  it  would  have  reptoba- 


*  The  Syriac  translation  supposes  the  Greek  in  this  verse  ix^  '^  <apoMr^(f^, 
KoU  ^aXfv  olvaxafv(^S(f^ai,  &c. ;  instead  of  the  received  reading,  xdi  'iraja^iifoirdiJsy 
raXfv  dvoxouvi^siv,  4bc.  •    .  ^  r- 

■•',•''■'  '•       '         "■'■  -Ki^ 

I    ^  ^      ,  .  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC 


HEBREWS,    VII. 


401 


tioDy  and  be  not  far  from  a  curse,  and  its  end  would 

9  be  a  burning.      (9)  But,  in  regard  to  you,  my 

brethren,  we  are  persuaded  better  things,  and  things 

10  pertaining  to  life,<i  although  we  thus  speak.     (10)  *  6r.  $dlvathn 
For  God  is  not  unrighteous,  to  forget  your  works, 
and  your  charity  which  ye  have  shown  in  his  name, 
in  that  ye  have  ministered  and  do  minister  to  the 

11  saints.  (11)  And  we  desire,  that  each  one  of  you 
may  show  this  same  activity,®  for  the  completion  of 

12  your  hope,  even  to  the  end:  (12)  and  that  ye^Jaint.'  Sy. 
-,not ;    but  that  ye  be  emulators  of  them  who  by    ')7r>^>g^. 

faith  and  patience  have  become  heirs  of  the  promise. 

18  (13)  For  when  God  made  the  promise  to  Abraham, 

because  there  was  none  greater  than  himself  by 

14  whom  he  could  swear,  he  swore  by  himself;  (14) 
and  said :  Blessing,  I  will  bless  thee,  and  multiplying 

15  I  will  multiply  thee.    (15)  And  so  he  was  patient, 

16  and  obtained  the  promise.  (16)  For  men  swear  by 
one  greater  than  themselves :  and  in  every  contro- 
versy that  occurs  among  them,  the  sure  termination 

17  of  it  is  by  an  oath.  (17)  Therefore,  God,  being 
abundantlv  willing  to  show  to  the  heirs  of  the 
promise,  that  his  promising  was  irreversible,  bound 

18  It  up  in  an  oath ;  (18)  so  that,  by  two  things  which 
change  not,  and  in  which  God  cannot  lie,  we,  who 
have  sought  refuge  in  him,  might  have  great  con 
solation,  and  might  hold  fast  the  hope  promised  to 

19  us ;  (19J  which  is  to  us  as  an  anchor,  that  retaineth 
our  soul,  so  that  it  swerveth  not ;  and  it  entereth 

20  into  that  within  the  veil,  (20)  whither  Jesus  hath 
previously  entered  for  us,  and  nath  become  a  priest^ 
forever,  after  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec.? 

Vn.  Now  this  Melchisedec  j^as  king  of  Salem,»  a 
priest  of  the  most  high  God :  and  he  met  Abraham, 
when  returning  from  the  slaughter  of  the  kings; 

2  and  blessed  him.  (2)  And  to  him  Abraham  im- 
uarted  tithes  of  all  that  he  had  with  him.  More- 
over his  name  is  interpreted  king  of  righteousness  ;*> 
and  again  [he  is  called]  King  of  Salem,  that  is  King 

8  of  Peace.«  (8)  Of  whom  neither  his  father  nor  his 
mother  are  written  in  the  genealogies;  nor  the 
commencement  of  his  days,  nor  the  end  of  his  life ; 
but,  after  the  likeness  of  the  Son  of  God,  his  priest- 

4  hood<^  remaineth  for  ever.®  (4)  And  consider  ye, 
how  great  he  was ;  to  whom  the  patriarch  Abraham 


Sy.  )|ioao 

rSy. 

Sy.    ^ii^lo 

Sy.    ]^VVo 

Sy.    ]^V^ 

Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


402 


HEBREWS,   VIL 


'sy. 


gsy.soNvN 


gave  tithes  and  first-fruits.    (5)  For  they  of  the  scms    6 
of  Levi  who  reoeived  the  priesthood,  had  a  statute 
of  the  law,  that  they  should  take  tithes  from  the 
people ;  they  from  their  brethren,  because  they  also 
are  of  the  seed  of  Abraham.    (6)  6ut  this  man,  who    6 
is  not  enrolled  in  their  ffenealo^ies,  took  tithes  from 
Abraham;  and  blessed  him  who  had  received  the 
promise.    (7)  But  it  is  beyond  controversy,  that    7 
the  inferior  is  blessed  by  his  superior.    (8)  And    8 
here,  men  who  die,  receive  the  tithes ;  but  there, 
he  of  whom  the  scripture  testifleth  that  he  liveth. 

(9)  And  through  Abraham,  as  one  may  say,  even  9 
Levi   who  receiveth  tithes,   was   himself  tithed. 

(10)  For  he  was  yet  in  the  loins  of  his  father,  when  10 
he  met  Melchiseaec.  (11)  I^  therefore,  perfection^  11 
had  been  by  means  of  the  priesthood  of  the  Levites, 

in  which  the  law  was  enjoined  on  the  people ;  why 
was  another  priest  required,  who  should  stand  up 
after  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec?  For  it  should 
have  said,  He  shall  be  after  the  likeness  of  Aaron. 
(12)  But  as  there  is  a  change  in  the  priesthood,  so  12 
also  is  there  a  change  in  the  law.  (18)  For  he  of  18 
whom  these  things  were  spoken,  was  born  of  another 
tribe,  of  which  no  one  ever  ministered  at  the  altar. 
(14J  For  it  is  manifest  that  our  Lord  arose  from 
Juaah,  from  a  tribe  of  which  Moses  said  nothing 
concerning  a  priesthood.  (15)  And  moreover  this 
is  further  manifest,  from  his  saying  that  another 

Sriest  will  stand  up,  after  the  likeness  of  Melchise- 
ec,  (16)  who  was  not  according  to  the  law  of  cor- 
poreal injunctions,  but  according  to  the  energy  of 
an  indissoluble  life.  (17)  For  he  testified  of  him :  17 
Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever,?  afl»r  the  likeness  of 
Melchisedec  (18)  And  the  change  which  was 
made  in  the  first  statute,^  was  on  account  of  its  im- 
potency,  and  because  their  was  no  utility  in  it. 
(19)  For  the  law  perfected  nothing;  but  in  the 
place  of  it  there  came  in  a  hope,  which  is  better  than 
It,  and  by  which  we  draw  near  to  God.— (20)  And 
he  confirmed  it  to  us  by  an  oath.  (21)  For  they  21 
became  priests  without  an  oath ;  but  this  man  by  an 
oath.  As  he  said  to  him  by  David :  The  Lord 
hath  sworn,  and  will  not  lie,  Thou  art  a  priest  for 
ever,  after  the  likeness  of  Melchisedec.  (22)  By  all  22 
this,  is  that  a  better  covenant*  of  which  Jesus  is  the 
sponsor.^ — (28)  And  they  as  priests  were  numerous,  28 


14 
15 


16 


18 


19 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,   VIIL 


403 


4- 


because  they  were  mortal,  and  were  not  permitted 

24  to  continue :  (24)  but  this  man,  because  he  standeth 

25  up  for  ever,  his  priesthood  doth  not  pass  away :  (25) 
and  he  is  able  to  vivify^  for  ever,  them  who  come 
to  God  by  him ;  for  he  always  liveth,  and  sendeth 

26  up  prayers  for  them. — (26)  For,  a  priest  like  to  him, 
was  also  suitable  for  us ;  one  pure,  and  without  evil 
and  without  stain ;  one  separated  from  sins,  and 

27  exalted  higher  than  heaven ;  (27)  and  who  is  not 
obliged,  every  day,  like  the  [Aaronic]  high  priest, 
to  first  ofier  sacrinces  for  his  own  sins,  and  then  for 
the  people ;  for  this  he  did  once,  by  oflfering  up  him- 

28  self.  (28)  For  the  law  constituted  feeble  men  priests ; 
but  the  word  of  the  oath,  which  was  subsequent  to 
the  law  [constituted]  the  Son  perfect  for  ever. 

VHX  Now  the  sum*  of  the  whole  is  this,  we  have  a 
High  Priest,  who  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the 

2  throne  of  the  Majesty  in  heaven :  (2)  And  he  is  the 
minister  of  the  sanctuary,  and  of  the  true  tabernacle, 

8  which  God  hath  pitched,  and  not  man.  (3)  For 
every  high  priest  is  established,  to  offer  oblations 
and  sacrifices ;  and  therefore,  it  was  proper  that  this 

4  one  should  also  have  something  to  offer.  (4)  And, 
if  he  were  on  earth,  he  would  not  be  a  priest;  be- 
cause there  are  priests  [there],  who  offer  oblations 

5  agpreeably  to  the  law:  (5)  [namely]  they,  who 
minister  in, the  emblem  and  shadow  of  the  things 
in  heaven :  as  it  was  said  to  Moses,  when  he  was 
about  to  build  the  tabernacle.  See,  and  make  every 
thing  according  to  the  pattern  which  was  showed 

6  thee  in  the  mount.  (6)  But  now,  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah hath  received  a  ministry  which  is  better  than 
that :  as  also  the  covenant,  ^  of  which  he  is  made  the 
Mediator,^  is  better,  and  is  given  with  better  prom- 

7  ises  than  the  former.— (7)  For,  if  the  first  [cove- 
nant] had  been  faultless,  tnere  would  have  been  no 

8  place  for  this  second  [one].  (8)  For  he  chideth  them 
and  saith :  Behold,  the  days  come,  saith  the  Lord, 
when  I  will  complete  withthe  family  of  the  house 
of  Israel,  and  ypik  the  family  of  the  house  of  Judah, 

9  anew  covenant;  (9)  not  like  the  covenant  which  I 

Kve  to  their  fathers,  in  the  day  when  I  took  them 
the  hand,  and  brought  them  out  of  the  land  of 
I^jypt ;  [and]  because  they  continued  not  in  my 
10  covenant,  I  also  rejected  them,  saith  the  Lord.    (10) 


»Gr. 


Sy.U-^^ 


^- 


-'t^    ^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


404 


HEBREWS,  IX. 


^y.give. 


'Bj.y^QQjQ 


Bf.  the  hdy 
hmte. 


'Sy.  VaJQOOm 


Sy.  lA2i3 


Sy. 

=Enij.  Bap- 
tisms. 


But  this  is  the  covenant  which  I  will  give  to  the 
family  of  the  house  of  Israel  after  those  days,  saith 
the  liord :  I  will  put^  my  law  in  their  minds,  and 
inscribe  it  on  their  hearts ;  and  I  will  be  to  them  a 
Gbd,  and  they  shall  be  to  me  a  people.    (11)  And  11 
one  shall  not  teach  his  fellow-citizen,  nor  his  brother, 
nor  say :  Know  thou  the  Lord :  because  they  shall 
all  know  me,  from  the  youngest  of  them  to  the  oldest 
(12)  And  I  will  forgive  them  their  iniquity;  and  12 
their  sins  will  I  remember  no  more.     (18)  In  that  18 
he  said  a  New  [Covenant],  he  made  the  first  old ; 
and  that  which  is  old  ana  decaying,  is  near  to  dis- 
solution. 

Now,  under  the  first  [covenant],  there  were  or-  IX. 
dinances*  of  ministration,  and  a  worldly  sanctuary. 
(2)  For  in  the  first  tabernacle  which  was  erected,     2 
there  was  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  the 
bread  of  the  presence ;  and  this  was  called  the  j 

Sanctuary.^    (3)  But  the  inner  tabernacle,  which    3 
was  within  the  second  veil,  was  called  the  Holy  of 
Holies.    (4)  And  there  were  in  it  the  golden  censer,     4 
and  the  ark  of  the  covenant,  which  was  all  over- 
laid with  gold ;  and  in  it  were  the  golden  urn  which 
contained  the  manna,  and  the  rod  of  Aaron  which 
sprouted,  and  the  tables  of  the  covenant ;   (5)  and    5 
over  it  were  the  cherubim  of  glory,  whicR  over- 
shadowed the  mercy  seat.<^    But  there  is  not  time 
to  speak  particularly  of  each  of  the  things  which 
were  so  arranged.     (6)  And  into  the  outer  taber-     6 
nacle  the  priests,  at  all  time?,  entered,  and  perform- 
ed their  ministration.     (7)  But  into  the  interior     7 
tabernacle,  once  a  year  only,  the  high  priest  entered, 
with  the  blood  which  he  offered  for  himself  and  for 
the  sins  of  the  people.     (8)  And  by  this  the  Holy     8 
Spirit  indicated,  that  the  way  to  the  holy  [place^  | 

was  not  yet  manifested,  so  long  as  the  first  taber-  I 

nacle  was  standing:   (9)  and  it  was  a  ^gjyiJjol^**  for     9 
that  time,  during  which  oblation  and  sacrifices  were 
offered  that  could  not  make  perfect  the  conscience 
of  him  who  offered  them :  (10)  but  [they  consisted]  10 
only  in  food  and  drink,  and  in  the  ablutions®  of 

divers  things ;  which  were  carnal  ordinances,  and 

were  set  up  until  the  time  of  a  reformation.-=-(il)  11         ^ 
But  the  Messiah  who  came,  was  a  High  Priest  of 
the  good  things  which  he  wrought :  and  he  entered 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,    IX. 


405 


into  the  great  and  perfect  tabernacle,  which  was  not 
made  with  hands  and  was  not  of  these  created  things. 

12  (12j  And  he  did  not  enter  with  the  blood  of  goats 
and  calves ;  but  with  the  blood  of  himself,  he  enter- 
ed once  into  the  sanctuary,  and  obtained  eternal  re- 

18  demption/  (18)  For  if  the  blood  of  goats  and  cjjves, 
with  the  ashes  of  a  heifer,  was  sprinKled  upon  them 
that  were  defiled,  and  sanctified  them  as  to  the 

14  purification  of  their  flesh ;  (14)  then  how  much  more 
will  the  blood  of  the  Messiah,  who  by  the  eternal 
Spirit  offered  himself  without  blemish  to  God,  purge 
our  conscience^  from  dead  works,  so  that  we  may 

15  serve  the  living  God  ?  (15)  And  for  this  reason  he 
became  the  Mediator  of  the  new  covenant,  J»  that  he 
might  by  his  death  be  redemption,*  to  them  who  had 
transgressed  the  first  covenant;  so  that  they,  who 
are  called  to  the  eternal  inheritance,  might  receive 

16  th<^  promiftft.-i-ri  ft)  For  where  there  is  a  testament,^  it 
"I^  indicateth  the  death  of  him  who  made  it    (17)  For 

it  is  valid,  only  of  a  deceased  [person]  ;  because  it 

18  hath  no  use,  so  long  as  the  maker  of  it  liveth.  (18) 
Therefore  also  the  first  [covenant]  was  not  confirm- 

19  ed  without  blood.  (19)  For  when  the  whole  ordi- 
nancei  had  been  propounded  by  Moses  to  all  the 
people,  according  to  tne  law ;  Moses  took  the  blood 
of  a  heifer,  and  water,  with  scarlet  wool  and  hyssop, 
and  sprinkled  upon  the  books  and  upon  all  the  peo- 

20  pie;  (20)  and  said  to  them.  This  is  the  blood  of  the 

21  covenant  which  is  enjoined  by  God.  (21)  With 
that  blood  he  also  sprinkled  upon  the  tabernacle, 

22  and  upon  all  the  vessels  of  ministration :  (22)  be- 
cause every  thing,  according  to  the  law,  is  purified 
with  blood :  and  without  the  shedding  of  blood,  there 

28  is  no  remission.  (28)  For  it  was  necessary  that 
these,  the  emblems  of  heavenly  things,  should  be 
purified,  with  those  things ;  but  the  heavenly  things 

24  themselves,  with  sacrifices  superior  to  them.  (24) 
For  the  Messiah  entered  not  into  the  sanctuary  made 
with  hands,  which  is  the  emblem™  of  the  true 
[sanctuary] :  but  he  entered  into  heaven  itself  to 

25  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us.  (25)  Neither 
[was  it  necessary],  that  he  should  offer  himself  many 
times,  as  the  high  priest  entered  every  year  into 

26  the  sanctuary,  with  blood  not  his  own :  (26)  other- 
wise, he  must  have  suffered  many  times,  since  the 
oommencement  of  the  world ;  but  now  in  the  end 


Sy.Va-O: 


»a2) 


Sy.^U 

Sy.  \nLk} 

Sy.  \LOiCLQ 

■  Sy.  VoA^J, 
which  is  haOi 
a  covenant  and 
a  testament 

Sy.)j|.Oa£> 


ro.'t  -  i  r„ 


/  ^ 


-  Sy.  IZoiOl 


Digitized  by 


Google 


406 


HEBREWS,    X. 


'  gy.  l^u^Vv 


®  Gr.  itdvatum. 


Bj.^^M^iS^ 


By.  \oLky 
Sy.tiaviVil 


of  the  world,  >^  lie  bath  once  offered  himself  in  a 
self'sac^ce,  to  abolish  sin.  (27)  And,  as  it  is  ap-  27 
pointed  to  men,  that  they  must  once  die,  and  after 
their  death  is  the  judgment;  (28)  so  also  the  Mes-  28 
siah  was  once  offered ;  and,  by  himself  he  immola- 
ted the  sins  of  many :  and  a  second  time,  without 
sins,  will  he  appear  for  the  life<>  of  them  who  ex- 
pect  hiioA^X)  For  in  the  law  there  was  a  shadow  X. 
oflEe  ^ood  thmgs  to  come ;  not  the  suj^gtanoe  of 
the  things  themselves.  Therefore,  although  the 
same  sacrifices  were  every  year  offered,  they  could 
never  perfect  those  who  offered  them.  (2)  For,  if  2 
they  had  perfected  them,  they  would  long  ago  have 
desisted  -from  their  offerings;  because  their  con- 
science could  no  more  disquiet  them,  who  were 
once  purified,  on  account  of  their  sins.  (8)  But  in 
those  sacrifices,  they  eveir  year  recogmzed  their 
sins.  (4)  For  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  can- 
not pur^e  away  sins.  (5)  Therefore,  when  entering 
the  world,  he  said :  In  sacrifices  and  oblations,  thou 
hast  not  had  pleasure ;  but  thou  hast  clothed  me 
with  a  body.  (6)  And  holocausts  on  account  of 
sins,  thou  hast  not  asked.  (7)  Then  I  said :  Behold 
I  oome,  as  it  is  written  of  me  in  the  beginning*  of 
the  books,  to  do  thy  pleasure,  0  God,  (S)  He  first 
said:  Sacrifices  and  oblations  and  holocausts  for 
sins,  which  were  offered  according  to  the  law,  thou 
desiredst  not;  (9)  and  afterwards  he  said:  Behold 
I  oome  to  do  thy  pleasure,  0  God :  hereby,  he 
abolished  the  former,  that  he  might  establish  the 
latter.  (10)  For  by  this  his  pleasure,  we  are  sancti- 
fied; through  the  offering  or  the  body  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  a  single  time.  (11)  For  every  high  priest  11 
who  stood  and  ministered  daily,  offered  again  and 
again  the  same  sacrifices,  which  never  were  su£Elcient 
to  purge  awa;^  sins.  (12)  But  this  [Priest]  offered  one  12 
sacrifice  fbr  sins,  and  for  ever  sat  down  at  the  riffht 
lumd  of  Gtod ;  (18)  and  thenceforth  waited,  until  his  18 
foes  should  be  placed  as  a  footstool  under  his  feet 
(14)  For  by  one  offering,  he  hath  perfected  for  ever, 
them  who  are  sanctified  by  hinJgA  (15)  And  the 
Holy  Spirit  also  testifieth  to  us,  ijy  saying:  (16) 
This  is  the  covenant^  which  I  will  give  them  after 
those  days,  saith  the  Lord ;  I  will  put  my  law<^  into 
their  minds,  and  inscribe  it  on  their  hearts ;  (17)  17 
and  their  iniquity  and  their  sins,  I  will  not  remem- 


9 


10 


14 
15 
16 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,   X. 


407 


19 
20 


18  ber  against  them.  ^18)  Now,  where  there  is  a  re- 
mission of  sins,  there  is  no  offering  for  sin  demanded. 
We  have  therefore,  my  brethren,  assurance^  in 
entering  into  the  sanctuary,  by  the  blood  of  Jesus, 
and  by  a  way  of  life,  (20)  which  he  hath  now  con- 
secrated for  us,  through  the  veil,  that  is  his  flesh. 

21  f21)  And  we  have  a  high  priest  over  the  house  of 

22  God.  (22^  Let  us,  therefore  draw  near,  with  a  true 
heart,  ana  with  the  confidence  of  faith,  being 
sprinkled  as  to  our  hearts,  and  pure  fix)m  an  evil 
conscience,  and  our  body  being  washed^  with  pure 

23  water.  (28)  And  let  us  persevere  in  the  profession 
of  our  hope,  and  not  waver;  for  he  is  fkithfiil  who 

X    ^^f^  bath  made  the  promise  to  us.    (24)  And  let  us  look  ^ 
-  ^        ^  on  each  other,,  for  the  excitement  of  love  and  good 
26  works.    (26)  And  let  us  not  forsake  our  meetings,*" 
as  is  the  custom  of  some ;   but  entreat  ye  one  an- 
other;  and  the  more,  as  ye  see  that  day  draw  near.-— 

26  (26)  For  if  a  man  sin,  voluntarily,  after  he  hath  re- 
ceived a  knowledge  of  the  truth,  there  is  no  longer  a 

27  sacrifice  which  may  be  offered  for  sins :  (27)  but  the 
fearftd  judgment  impendeth,  and  the  zeal  of  firef 
that  consumeth  the  adversaries.  (28)  For  if  he,  who 
transgressed  the  law  of  Moses,  diea  without  merdea, 
at  the  mouth  of  two  or  three  witnesses ;  (29)  how 
much  more,  think  yq,  will  he  receive  capital  punish- 
ment, who  hath  trodden  upon  the  Son  of  God,  and 
hath  accounted  the  blood  of  his  covenant,  by  which 
he  is  sanctified,  as  the  blood  of  all  men,  and  hath 

30  treatecLthe^Spirit  of  grace  with  contumelv  ?  (80) 
For  we.  know  "hirn  wHoTiath  said,  Betrioution  is 
mine ;  and  I  will  repay :  and  again,  The  Lord  will 

31  judge  his  people.    (Sl)  It  is  very  terrible, J»  to  fidl 

32  into  the  hands  of  the  hving  God.— (32)  Therefore, 
recollect  ye  the  former  days,  those  in  which  ye  re- 
ceived baptism,»  and  endured  a  great  conflict  of  suf- 

33  ferings,  with  reproach  and  affliction ;  (33)  and  ye 
were  a  gazing  stock^  and  also  were  the  associates  of 

34  persons  whoendured  these  things :  (34)  and  ye  were 
grieved  for  those  who  were  imprisoned;  and  ye 
cheerfully  endured  the  plundering  of  your  goods, 
because  ye  knew  that  ye  had  a  possession  in  heaven, 

36  superior  and  not  transitory.    (35)  Therefore  cast  not 

,  away  your  assurance^  which  is  to  have  a  great  re- 

86  ward.  (36)  For  ye  have  need  of  patience ;  that  ye  may 

do  the  pleasure  of  God,  and  may  receive  the  prom- 


*  Sy.  open  face 


Sy. 


'Sy. 
^  ■  •0 1 n 


28 
29 


«  6r.  €upk 


^  Sy.  a  great 
fear, 

»Gr. 


*  Sy.  openness 
of  counte- 
nance. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


408 


HEBREWS,   XI. 


iiaye^l 


'  or,  (he  fiat. 


By.  oJA^I 


Gr.  talvcWum, 


ise.    (87)   Because,  jet  a  little, — and  it  is  a  yery  87 
little  time, — ^when  he  that  cometh,  will  come,  and 
will  not  delay.     (38)    Now  the  just  by  my  faith,  38 
will  live:  but  if  he  draw  back,  my  soul  will  not 
iiaye^leasure  in  him^  (39)  But  we  are  not  of  that  39 
drawing-lac^  which  leadeth  to  perdition ;  but  of 
that  fidth,  which  maketh  us  possess  our  souL 


Now  Mth  is  the  persuasions^  of  the  things  that  XI. 
are  in  hope,  as  if  they  were  in  act ;  and  fit  is]  the 
manifestness^  of  the  things  not  seen.     (2)    And    2 
for  it  the  ancients  are  well  testified  of. — (3)  For  by    8 
feith,  we  understand  that  the  worlds  were  framed 
by  the  word®  of  God ;  and  that  things  seen,  origi- 
nated from  those  that  are  not  seen.— (4^  By  &itn,    4 
Abel  offered  to  Gbd  a  better  sacrifice  tnan  that  of 
Cain ;  and  on  account  of  it,  he  is  testified  of  that  he 
was  righteous,  and  God  bore  testimony  to  his  offer- 
ing; and  in*  consequence  thereof,  though  dead  he 
yet  speaketh.    (5)  By  faith,  Enoch  was  translated,  <*     5 
and  aid  not  taste  death ;  and  he  was  not  found,  be- 
cause God  had  translated  him :  for,  before  he  trans- 
lated him,   there  was  testimony  of  him,  that  he 
pleased  God.    (6)  But,  without  faith,  a  man  cannot    6 

E lease  God.    For  he  that  draweth  near  to  God,  must 
elieve  his  existence,  and  that  he  will  recompense 
those  who  seek  him.     (7)  By  faith  Noah,  when  he    7 
was  told  of  things  not  seen,  feared ;  and  he  made 
himself  an  ark,  for  the  life®  of  his  household;  where- 
by he  condemned  the  world,  and  became  an  heir 
of  the  righteousness  which  is  by  faith^^S)  By  faith     8 
Abraham,  whenhe  was  callev^fl5eyed,  and  depart- 
ed to  the  place  which  he  was  to  receive  for  an  in- 
heritance:  and  he  departed,  while  he  knew  not 
whither  he  was  going.    (9)  By  faith,  he  became  a     9 
resident  in  the  land  that  was  promised  him,  as  in  a 
foreign  land;  and  abode  in  tents,  with  Isaac  and 
Jacob,  the  heirs  with  him  of  the  same  promise. 
(10)  For  he  looked  for  the  city  that  hath  a  founda-  10 
tion,  of  which  the  builder  and  maker  is  God.  (11)  By  11 
faith,  Sarah  also,  who  was  barren,  acquired  energy 
to  receive  seed ;  and,  out  of  the  time  of  her  years, 
she  brought  forth ;  because  she  firmly  believed,  that 
he  was  raithful  who  had  promised  her.    (12)  There-  12 
fore,  from  one  man  failing  through  age,  numbers 
were  born,  like  the  stars  in  the  heavens,  and  like 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,   XL 


409 


the  sand  on  the  shore  of  the  sea  which  is  innumer- 

13  able.  (18)  All  these  died  in  feith,  and  received 
not  their  promise ;  but  they  saw  it  afar  ofl^  and  re- 
joiced in  it;  and  they  confessed  that  they  were 

14  strangers  and  pilgrims  on  the  earth.  (14)  Now 
they  who  say^mus,  sEow  that  they  seek  a  city. 

15  (15)  But  if  they  had  been  seeking  that  city  from 
which  they  came  out,  they  had  opportunity  to  re- 

16  turn  again  and  go  to  it.  (16)  But  now  it  is  manifest 
that  they  longed  for  a  better  [city]  than  that,  [name- 
ly,] for  that  which  is  in  heaven.  Therefore  Grod  did 
not  refuse  to  be  called  their  God ;  for  he  prepared 

17  for  them  the  city.  (IT)  By  faith  Abraham,  m  his 
trial,  offered  up  Isaac ;  and  he  laid  on  the  altar  his 

18  only  Son,  whom  he  had  received  by  promise.  (18) 
For  it  had  been  said  to  him,  In  Isaac  shall  thv  seed 

19  be  called.  (19)  And  he  reasoned  with  himself  that 
God  was  able  even  to  raise  Hiim]  from  the  dead : 
and  therefore,  in  the  similitude^  [of  a  resurrection], 

20  he  was  restored?  to  him.     (20)  By  faith  in  what  was 

21  to  be,  Isaac  blessed  Jacob  and  Esau.  (21)  By  faith 
Jacob,  when  dying,  blessed  each  of  the  sons  of 
Joseph,  and  bowed  himself  on  the  top  of  his  sta£ 

22  (22)  By  faith  Joseph,  when  dying,  was  mindful  of 
the  departure  of  tne  children  of  Israel^  and  gave 

23  direction  concerning  his  bones.— ((23)  B v  ftitttije- 
parents  of  Moses,  after  he  was  born,  hid  him  three 
months ;  because  they  saw  he  was  a  goodly  child ; 
and  they  were  not  deterred  by  the  command  of  the 

24  king.  (24)  By  faith  Moses,  when  he  became  a  man, 
refiSed  to  oe  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  daughter. 

25  (25)  Abd  he  chose  to  be  in  affliction  with  the  peo- 
ple of  God,  and  not  to  live  luxuriously  in  sin  for  a 

26  short  season :  (26)  and  he  esteemed  the  reproach  of 
the  Messiah  a  greater  treasure  than  the  hoarded 
riches  of  Egypt ;  for  he  looked  upon  the  recompense 

27  of  reward.  (27)  By  faith,  he  left  Eg3rpt,  and  was 
not  terrified  by  the  wrath  of  the  king ;  and  he  con- 
tinued to  hope,  just  as  if  he  saw  the  invisible  God, 

28  (28)  Bj  faith,  they  kept**  the  passover,  and  the 
sprinkling  of  blood,  that  he  who  destroyed  the  first- 

29  born  might  not  approach  them.  (29)  By  faith,  they 
passed  the  Red  Sea,»  as  on  dry  land ;  and  in  it  the 
Egyptians  were  swallowed  up,  when  they  dared  to 

SO  enter  it— (30)  Bv  faith,  the  walls  of  Jericho  fell 
down,  when  they  had  been  encompassed  seven  days. 


"•  / 


^  Sy.  made. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


410 


H£BR£WS»   XIL 


Sy.p^M 


V. 


'^  or,  burdens. 


^  or,  $§lve8. 


(81)  By  &itb  Bahab,  the  harlot^  perished  not  with  81 
them  who  j^elievedjiQ^  when  she  receiyed  the  spies 

(82)   What  more  shall  I  say?     For  I  82 
little  tmie  to  tell  of  Gideon,  and  of  Barak,  and 
of  Sampson,  and  of  Jephtha,  and  of  David,  and  of 
Samuel,  ana  of  the  other  prophets :    (88)  who,  by  83 
faith,  subdued  kingdoms,  and  wrought  righteous- 
ness, and  receiyed  promises,  and  shut  the  mouths  of 
lions,  (84)  and  quenched  the  force*^  of  fire,  and  were  84 
rescuea  from  the  edge  of  the  sword,  and  were  healed 
of  diseases,  and  became  strong  in  battle,  and  routed 
the  cam^  of  enemies,  (85)  and  restored  to  women  86 
their  children,  by  a  resurrection  &om  the  dead. 
And  some  died  under  tortures,  and  did  not  hope  to 
escape,  that  there  might  be  for  them  a  better  resur- 
rection;   (86)  and  others  endured  mockings  and  86 
scourgings ;  others  were  deliyered  up  to  bonds  and 
prisons;  (87)  others  were  stoned ;  otners  were  saw-  87 
ed;  others  oied  by  the  edge  of  the  sword;  others 
roamed  about  clothed  in  sheep  skins  and  goat  skins, 
and  were  needy,  and  afflicted,  and  agitated ;  (88J  38 
persons  of  whom  the  world  was  not  worthy,  ana 
yet  they  were  as  wanderers  in  the  desert,  and  in 
mountains,  and  in  cayes,  and  in  caverns  of  the  earth. 
— (89)  And  all  these,  of  whose  faith  there  is  testimo-  89 
ny,  received  not  the  promise :  (40)  because  God  had  40 
provided  the  aid  for  us ;  so  that  without  us  they 
should  not  be  perfected.— (XIL)  Therefore  let  us  XIL 
also,  who  have  all  these  witnesses  surrounding  us 
like  clouds,  cast  from  us  all  encumbrances,*  and  sin, 
which  is  always  prepared  for  us ;  and  let  us  run 
with  patience  the  race  that  is  appointed  for  ts.    (2)    2 
And  let  us  look  on  Jesus,  who  hath  become  the 
commencement  and  the  completion  of  our  &ith ; 
who,  on  account  of  the  joy  tnere  was  for  him,  en- 
dured the  cross,  and  surrendered  himself  to  oppro- 
brium ;  and  is  seated  on  the  right  hand  of  the  throne 
of  God.  (8)  Behold,  therefore,  how  much  he  suffered    8 
from  sinners,  from  them  who  are  adversaries  of  their 
own  soul,^  that  ye  may  not  be  discouraged,  nor 
your  soul  become  remiss. 

Ye  have  not  yet  come  unto  blood,  in  the  contest    4 
against  sin.     (5)  And  ye  have  forgotten  the  moni-    5 
tion,  which  saith  to  you,  as  to  children.  My  son,  dis- 
regard not  the  chastening  of  the  Lord ;  nor  let  thy 
soul  faint,  when  thou  art  rebuked  by  him,    (6)  For,    6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,   XII. 


411 


oT" 


whom  the  Lord  loveth,  he  chasteneth;   and  he 
scourgeth  those  sons,  for  whom  he  hath  kind  re- 

7  gards.  (7^  Therefore  endure  ye  the  chastisemenfj^ 
because  God  is  dealing  with  you  as  with  sons. 
For  what  son  is  there,  whom  his  father  chasteneth 

8  not?  (8)  But  if  ye  are  without  that  chastisement, 
with  which  every  one  is  chmstened,  ye  are'"^cbme 

9  strangers  ana'^dt  sons.    "(9)  "AnduouFfathers 
the  flesh  'chaslened'  us,  and  we  revered  them,  how 
much  more  ought  we  to  be  submissive  to  our  spirit- 

10  ual  fathers,®*  and  live?  (10)  For  they  chastened  us 
for  a  short  time,  according  to  their  pleasure ;  but 
God,  for  our  advantage,  that  we  may  become  par- 

11  takers  of  his  holiness.  (11)  Now  all  chastisement, 
in  the  time  of  it,  is  not  accounted  a  matter  of  joy, 
but^  grief:  yet,  afterwards,  it  yieldeth  the  fruits 
of  peace  and  righteousness  to  them  who  ara.fixeC'^ 

12  cised  by  it-^^Isf) '  Wherefore,  strengthen  ve  your 

13  relaxed  hands,  and  your  tottering  knees :  (18)  and 
make  straight  paths  for  your  feet,  that  the  limb  which 
is  lame  may  not  be  wrenched,  but  may  be  healed. 

14  (14)  Follow  after  peace  with  every  man ;  and  after 
holiness,  without  which  a  man  will  not  see  our 

15  Lord.  (15)  And  be  careful,  lest  any  be  found  among 
you  destitute  of  the  grace  of  God ;  or  lest  some  root 
of  bitterness  shoot  forth  germs,  and  trouble  you ; 

16  and  thereby  many  be  defiled :  (16)  or  lest  any  one 
be  found  among  you  a  fornicator ;  or  a  heedless  one 
like  Esau,  who  for  one  mess  of  food,  sold  his  prime- 

17  geniture.  (17)  For  ye  know  that,  afterwards  when 
he  wished  to  inheritthe  blessing,  he  was  rejected ; 
for  he  found  not  a  place  for  repentance,  although 

18  he  sought  it  with  tears. — (18)  For  ye  have  not 
come  to  the  fire  that  burned,  and  the  tangible 
[mount] ;  nor  to  the  darkness  and  obscurity  and 

19  tempest ;  (19)  nor  to  the  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and 
the  voice  of  words,  which  they  who  heard,  entreated 

20  that  it  might  no  more  be  spoken  to  them ;  (20)  for 
they  could  not  endure  what  was  commanded.  And 
even  a  beast,  if  it  approached  the  mountain,  was  to 

21  be  stoned.     (21)  And  so  terrible  was  the  sight,  that 

22  Moses  said,  I  fear  and  tremble.  (22)  But  ye  have 
come  to  Mount  Zion,  and  to  the  city  of  the  living 


•  Gr.  T^  lewTfi 


%L^w.^,n 


P       //  /    ^- 


r/^  -'  •  :  ^'i : , 


*  This,  undoubtedly,  is  a  spurious  readuig;  for  it  eonflicts  with  the  Greek,  and 
disagrees  with  the  eontext 


Digitized  by 


Google 


412 


HEBREWS,   XIII. 


*  or,  in  you. 


*  or,  discourse 
^Chd, laiah 


Gbd,  the  Jerusalem  that  is  in  heaven ;  and  to  the 
assemblies  of  myriads  of  angels ;  (23)  and  to  the  28 
church**  of  the  first-born,  who  are  enrolled  in  heaven ; 
and  to  God  the  judge  of  all ;  and  to  the  spirits  of 
the  iust,  who  are  perfected ;   (24)  and  to  Jesus,  the  24 
Mediator®  of  the  new  covenant ;  and  to  the  sprink- 
ling of  his  blood,  which  speaketh  better  than  that 
of  Abel. — (25)  Beware,  therefore,  lest  ye  refiise  [to  26 
hear]  him  who  speaketh  with  you.     For  if  they 
escaped  not,  who  refused  [to  hear]  him  who  spake 
with  them  on  the  earth,  how  much  more  shall  we 
not,  if  we  refuse  [to  hear]  him  who  speaketh  with 
us  from  heaven  ?    (26)  Whose  voice  [then]  shook  26 
the  earth;  but  now  he  hath  promised,  and  said,  yet 
again  once  more,  I  will  shake  not  the  earth  only, 
but  also  heaven.      (27)  And  this  his  expression,  27 
Once  more,  indicateth  the  mutation  of  the  things 
that  are  shaken,  because  they  are  fabricated ;  that 
the  things  which  will  not  be  shaken,  may  remain, 
(28)  Snce,  therefore,  we  have  received  a  kingdom  28 
that  is  unshaken,  let  us  grasp  the  grace  whereby 
we  may  serve  and  please  God,  with  reverence  and 
fear.    (29)  For  our  God  is  a  consuming  fire.  29 

Let  love  for  the  brethren  dwell  among*  you.  Xlll. 
(2)  And  forget    not  kindness  to  strangers;    for    2 
thereby  some  have  been  privileged  to  entertain  an- 
gels, unawares.    (3)  And  remember  those  in  bonds,     8 
as  if  ye  were   bound  with  them :    and  recollect 
those  in  affliction,  as  being  yourselves  clothed  in 
flesh.— f4)  Marriage  is  honorable  in  all ;  and  their    4 
bed  unaefiled :  but  whoremongers  and  adulterers, 
God  will  judge.     (5)  Let  not  your  mind  love    5 
money ;  but  let  what  ye  have,  satisfy  you.    For 
the  I^rd  himself  hath  said,  I  will  never  leave  thee, 
nor  slacken  the  hand  towards  thee.    (6)  And  it    6 
belongeth  to  us,  to  say  confidently.  My  Lord  is  my 
aider,  I  will  not  fear.     What  can  man  do  to  me  ? 
(7)  Remember  your  guides,^  who  have  spoken  to 


l^ 


you  godly  discourse  ]^  examine  the  issue" of  their  T'j-^aXMrv* 
course,  ^nd  imitate  their  fSith.— (8)  JSus  the  Mes-  ^8 

ih  is  the  same^  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.    ''^''. 
(9)  Be  not  led  away  by  strange  and  variable  doc-    9   '     , . 
tnnes.    For  it  is  a  good  thing,  that  we  strengthen 
our  hearts  with  grace,  and  not  with  meats;   for 
those  have  not  been  benefited  who  walked  in  them 


Digitized  by 


Google 


HEBREWS,   XIII. 


413 


10  (10)  And  we  have  an  altar,  of  which  they  who 
minister  in  the  tabernacle  have  no  right  to  eat. 

11  (11)  For  the  flesh  of  those  animals,  whose  blood 
the  high  priest  brought  into  the  sanctuary  for  sins, 

12  was  burned  without  the  camp.  (12)  For  this  rea- 
son, Jesus  also*  that  he  might  sanctify  his  people 

18  with  his  blood,  suflfered  without  the  city.  (13) 
Therefore,  let  us  also  go  forth  to  him,  without  the 

14  camp,  clothed  with  his  reproach :  (14)  (for  we  have 
here  no  abiding  city ;  but  we  expect  one  that  is 

15  future :)  (15)  and  through  him,  let  us  at  all  times 
offer  to  God  the  sacrifices  of  praise,  that  is,  the 
fruits  of   lips  which  give  thanks  to  his  name. 

16  (16)  And  forget  not  commiseration  and  communi- 
cation with  the  poor;  for  with  such  sacrifices  a 

17  man  pleaseth  God.  (17)  Confide  in  your  guides,^ 
and  nearken  to  them;  for  they  watch  for  your 
souls,  as  men  who  must  give  an  account  of  you, 
that  they  may  do  this  with  joy  and  not  with  an- 
guish;  for  that  would  not  be  profitable  to  you. 

18  — (18)  Pray  ye  foTus ;  for  we  trust  we  have  a  good 
'  cogscioi^ness,  that  in  all  things  we  desire  to  con- 

19  duel 'ourselves  well.  (19)  Especially  do  I  request 
you  to  do  this,  that  I  may  return  to  you  speedily, 

20  May  the  God  of  peace, — who  brought  up  from 
the  dead  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  flock,  by  the 
blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  namely  Jesus 

21  the  Messiah,  our  Lord,— (21)  make  you  perfect  in 
every  good  work,  that  ye  may  do  his  pleasure ; 
and  himself  operate  in  you  that  which  is  pleasing 
in  his  sight,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  to  whom 
be  glory  for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

22  And  I  beseech  you,  my  brethren,  that  ye  be  pa- 
tient under  this  word  of  exhortation ;  for  it  is  in 

23  few  words  I  have  written  to  you. — (23^  And  know 
ye,  that  our  brother  Timothy  is  set  at  liberty :  and 
if  he  come  soon,  I,  with  him,  shall  see  you. — 

24  (24)  Salute  all  your  guides,®  and  all  the  saints. 
26  All  they  of  Italy  salute  you. — (25)  Grace  be  with 

you  alL    Amen. 

End  of  the  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews ;  which  was  written  from 
hidy  cf  Rome;  and  was  sent  by  the  hands  of  Timothy. 


'  <>  •'  t  ^^  1 


'^fx.^ 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Epistle  of  James  the  Legate. 


•OTtfMOe. 


in  his  doings. 


2 

8 


Jakes,  a  servant  of  God,  and  of  our  Lord  Jesos 
the  Messiah ; — ^to  the  twelve  tribes  dispersed  among 
the  Gtentiles; — greeting.* 

Let  it  be  all  joy  to  you,  my  brethren,  when  ye 
enter  into  many  and  various  triaJs.    (8)   For  ye 
know,  that  the  trial  of  [your]  faith,  maketh  you 
possess  patience.      (4)   And  let  patience  have  its 
perfect  work,  so  that  ve  may  be  complete  and  per- 
fect, and  may  lack  notning.— (5)  And  if  any  of  you 
lacketh  wisdom,  let  him  ask  [it]  of  God,  who  giv- 
eth  to  all  freely,**  and  reproacheth  not ;  and  it  will 
be  given  him.    (6)  But  let  him  ask  in  faith,  not 
hesitating:  he  who  hesitateth  is  like  the  waves  of 
the  sea,  which  the  wind  agitateth.    (7)  And  let  not    7 
that  man  expect  to  receive  any  thii^  of  the  Lord, 
(8^  who  is  hesitating  in  his  mind,  and  unstable  in    8 
iJl  his  ways.— (9)  And  let  the  depressed  brother    9 
rejoice,  in  his  elevation ;  (10)  and  the  rich,  in  his  10 
depression ;   because,  like  the  flower  of  an  herb,  so 
he  passeth  away.    (11)  For  the  sun  riseth  in  its 
heat,  and  drieth  up  the  herb ;  and  its  flower  fitll- 
eth,  and  the  beauty  of  its  appearance  perisheth ; 
so  also  the  rich  man  withereth  in  his  ways.*^ — 
(12)  Blessed  is  the  man  who  endureth  temptations ; 
so  that  when  he  is  proved  he  may  receive  a  crown 
of  life,  which  God  hath  promised  to  them  that  love 
him.     (13)  Let  no  one  when  he  is  tempted,  say,  I 
am  tempted  of  God :  for  God  is  not  tempted  with 
evils,^  nor  doth  he  tempt  any  man.    (14)  but  eveiy  14 
man  is  tempted  by  his  own  lust;  and  he  lusteth, 
and  is  drawn  away.     (15)  And  this  [his]  lust  con-  15 
ceiveth,  and  bringeth  forth  sin ;  and  sin,  when  ma- 
ture, bringeth  forth  death.— (16)  Do  not  err,  my  16 
beloved  brethren.    (17)  Every  good  and  perfect  17 
gift  cometh  down  from  above,  from  the  Father  of 


6 


11 


12 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JAMES,  II. 


416 


lights,  with  whom  is  no  mutation,  not  even  the 

18  shadow  of  change.  (18)  He  saw  fit,  and  begat  xm 
by  the  word  of  truth ;  that  we  might  be  the  first- 

19  firuits  of  his  creatures. — (19)  And  be  ye,  my  be- 
loved brethren,  every  one  of  you,  swift  to  hear,  and 

20  slow  to  speak;  and  slow  to  wrath:  (20)  for  the 
wrath  of  man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of 

21  God.  (21)  Wherefore,  remove  fiur  from  you  all 
impurity,  and  the  abundance  of  wickedness:  and. 
with  meekness,  receive  the  word  that  is  implanted 
in  our  nature,  which  is  able  to  vivify*  these  your 
souls. 

22  But  be  ye  doers  of  the  word,  and  not  hearers 
28  only ;  and  do  not  deceive  yourselves.    (28)  For  if 

any  man  shall  be  a  hearer  of  the  word,  and  not  a 
*  doer  of  it,  he  will  be  like  one  who  seeth  his  jGsioe  in 

24  a  mirror :  (24)  for  he  seeth  himself,  and  passeth  on, 

25  and  forgetteth  what  a  man  he  was.  (26)  But  every 
one  that  looketh  upon  the  perfect  law  of  liberty, 
and  abideth  in  it,  is  not  a  hearer  of  something  to 
be  forgotten,  but  a  doer  of  the  things;  and  he  will 

26  be  blessed  in  his  work.  (26)  And  if  any  one 
thinketh  that  he  worshippeth  God,  and  doth  not 
restrain  his  tongue,  but  nis  heart  deceiveth  him ; 

27  his  worship  is  vain.  (27)  For  the  worship^  that  is 
pure  and  noly  before  God  the  Father,  is  this:  to 
visit  the  fatherless  and  the  widows  in  their  afflic- 
tion, and  that  one  keep  himself  unspotted  from  the 

n.  world. — (IL)  My  brethren,  hold  ye  not  the  feith 
of  the  glory^  of  our  Lord  Jesus  tne  Messiah,  with 

2  a  respect  to  persons.  (2^  For  if  there  come  into 
your  assembly  a  man  witn  rings  of  gold  or  splen- 
did garments,  and  there  come  in  a  poor  man  in 

3  sordid  garments ;  (8)  and  ye  show  respect  to  him 
who  is  clothed  in  splendid  garments,  and  say  to 
him.  Seat  thyself  here,  conspicuously;  while  to  the 
poor  man,  ye  say,  Stand  thou  there,  or  sit  thou 

4  nere  before  my  footstool ;  (4)  are  ye  not  divided 
among  yourselves,  and  become  expositors  of  evil 

6  thoughts  ?  (5)  Hear,  my  beloved  brethren ;  hath 
not  God  chosen  the  poor  of  the  world,  but  the  rich 
in  faith,  to  be  heirs  in  the  kingdom  which  God 

6  hath  promised  to  them  that  love  him?  (6)  But 
ye  have  despised  the  poor  man.  Do  not  rich  men 
exalt  themselves  over  you,  and  drag  y  )u  before  the 

7  tribunals  ?    (7)  Do  they  not  revue  that  worthy 


•Gr. 


'S 


]J\m^mf 


nofu»  faith,' 


Digitized  by 


Google 


416 


JAMES,   IIL 


bSjr.AA^I 


Gz; 


^  Sy.  «o;>llo 


name,  which  is  invoked  upon  you  ?    (8)  And  if  in     8 
this  ye  fulfill  the  law  of  God,  as  it  is  written,  Thou 
shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as  thyself  ye  will  do  well : 
(9)  but  if  ye  have  respect  of  persons,  ye  commit  sin ;     9 
and  ye  are  convicted  by  the  law,  as  transgressors  of 
tiie  taw.    (10)  For  he  that  shall  keep  the  whole  10 
law,  and  yet  fail  in  one  [precept],  is  obnoxious**  to 
the  whole  law.    (11)  For  he  who  said,  Thou  shalt  11 
not  commit  adultery,   said  also,  Thou  shalt  not 
kill.    If  then  thou  commit  no  adultery,  but  thou 
killest,  thou  hast  become  a  transgressor  of  the  law. 
— (12)  So  speak  ye,  and  so  act,  a@  persons  that  are  12 
to  be  judged  by  the  law  of  liberty.      (13)  For  13 
judgment  without  mercy  shall  be  on  him,  who  hath 
practised  no  mercy :  by  mercy,  ye  will  be  raised 
above  judgment 

What  is  the  use,  my  brethren,  if  a  man  sav,  I  14 
have  &ith ;  and  he  hath  no  works?   can  his  raith 
vivify®  him?    (15)  Or  if  a  brother  or  sister  be  na-  15 
ked,  and  destitute  of  daily  food,  (16)  and  one  of  16 

Jou  say  to  them,  Go  in  peace,  warm  yourselves,  and 
e  full;  and  ye  ^ve  them  not  the  necessaries  of 
the  hodjj  what  is  the  use?     (IT)  So  also  faith  17 
alone,  without  works,  is  dead.— (18)  For  a  man  18 
may  say.  Thou  hast  faith,  and  I  have  works; 
show  to  me  thy  faith  that  is  without  works ;  and  I 
will  show  to  thee,  my  faith  by  my  works.    (19)  19 
Thou  believest  that  there  is  one  God;  thou  dost 
well ;  the  demons  also  believe,  and  tremble.    (20)  20 
Wouldst  thou  know,  0  firail  man,  that  faith  with- 
out works  is  dead  ?    (21)  Abraham  our  father,  was  21 
not  he  justified  by  works,  in  offering  his  son  Isaac 
upon  the  altar?     (22)  Seest  thou,  that  his  faith  22 
aided  his  works ;  and  that  by  the  works  his  Mth 
was  rendered  complete?    (23)  And  the  scripture  23 
was  fulfilled,  which  saith:    Abraham  believed  in 
God,  and  it  was  accounted  to  him  for  righteousness, 
and  he  was  called  the  Friend  of  God.— (24)  Thou  24 
seest,  that  by  works  a  man  is  justified^,  and  not  by 
feith  alone.    (25)  So  also  Rahab,  the  harlot,  was  25 
not  she  justified  by  works,  when  she  entertained 
the  spies,  and  sent  them  forth  by  another  way  ? 
(26)  As  the  body  without  the  spirit,  is  dead ;  so  26 
faith  without  works,  is  dead  also. 

Let  there  not  be  many  teachers  among  you,  my  IIL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JAMES,   IV. 


417 


brethren ;  but  know  ye,  that  we»  are  obnoxious  to 
2  a  severer  judgment   (2)  For  we  all  ofifend  in  many 

things.     Whoever  offendeth  not  in  discourse,  is  a 

perfect  man,  who  can  also  keep  his  whole  body  in 
8  subjection.    (3)   Behold,  we  put  bridles  into  the 

mouth  of  horses,  that  they  may  obey  us ;  and  we 

4  turn  about  their  whole  body.  (4)  Huge  ships  also, 
when  strong  winds  drive  them,  are  turned  about  by 
a  small  timber,  to  what  place  the  pleasure  of  the 

5  pilot  looketh.  (5)  So  likewise  the  tongue  is  a 
small  member,  and  it  exalteth  itself     Also  a  little 

6  fire  inflameth  large  forests.  (6)  Now  the  tongue 
is  a  fire,  and  the  world  of  sin  is  like  a  forest  And 
this  tongue,  which  is  one  amon^  our  members, 
marreth  our  whole  body;  and  it  inflameth  the 
series  of  our  generations  that  roll  on  like  a  wheel ; 

7  and  it  is  itself  on  fire.  (7)  For  all  natures**  of  beasts 
and  birds  and  reptiles,  of  the  sea  or  land,  are  sub- 

8  jueated  by  the  nature*^  of  man.  (8)  But  the  tongue 
nam  no  one  been  able  to  tame :  it  is  an  evil  thing, 

9  not  coercible,  and  foil  of  deadlv  poison.  (9)  For 
with  it,  we  bless  the  Lord  and  i^atner;  and  with  it 
we  curse  men,  who  were  made  in  the  image  of  God : 

10  (10)  and  firom  the  same  mouth,  proceed  curses  and 
blessings.     My  brethren,  these  things  ought  not  to 

11  be  so.   (11)  Can  there  flow  fi-om  the  same  fountain, 

12  sweet  waters  and  bitter?  (12)  Or  can  the  fig-tree, 
my  brethren,  bear  olives  ?  or  the  vine,  figs  ?  So  also 

18  salt  waters  cannot  be  made  sweet— (13)  Who  is 
wise  and  instructed  amon^  you  ?  Let  him  show  his 
works  in  praiseworthy  actions,  with  modest  wisdom. 

14  (14)  But  if  bitter  envy  be  in  you,  or  contention  in 
your  hearts,  exalt  not  yourselves  against  the  truth, 

15  and  lie  not  (15)  For  this  wisdom  cometh  not 
down  fi'om  above;    but  is  earthly,  and  from  the 

16  devices^  of  the  soul,  and  from  demons.  (16)  For 
where  envy  and  contention  are,  there  also  is  confa- 

17  sion,  and  every  thing  wrong.  (17)  But  the  wisdom 
which  is  from  above,  is  pure,  and  foil  of  peace,  and 
mUd,  and  submissive,  and  full  of  compassion  and  of 
good  fruits,  and  without  partiality,  and  without  re 

18  spect  of  persons.  (18)  And  the  fruits  of  righteous- 
ness are  sown  in  stillness,  by  them  who  make 
peace. 

lY.     Whence  is  it,  that  there  aie  among  you  fightings 


*  L  e.  /Ae  teaeh- 


•  Sy.  Ijla2l^ 


Sy  ]n>afci 


Digitized  by 


Google 


418 


Bj.U 


'  or,  superior. 


«   Gr.  save. 


JAMBS.   V. 

and  broils?  Is  it  not  from  the  lusts,  which  war  in 
your  members?  (2)  Ye  covet,  and  possess  not; 
and  ye  kill,  and  envy,  and  effect  nothing* :  and  ye 
fight  and  make  attacks ;  and  ye  have  not^  because 
ye  ask  not  (8)  Ye  ask,  and  receive  not ;  because 
ye  ask  wickealy,  that  ye  may  pamper  your  lusts. 
(4)  Ye  adulterers,  know  ye  not,  that  the  love  of  the 
world  is  hostility  towards  God  ?  He  therefore  who 
chooseth  to  be  a  lover  of  this  world,  is  the  enemy 
of  God.  (S)  Or  think  ye,  that  the  scripture  hath 
vainly  saia :  The  spirit  dwelling  in  us  lusteth  with 
envy?  (6)  But  our  Lord  hath  given  us  more*> 
grace.  Therefore  he  said :  The  Lord  humbleth  the 
k)fty,  and  giveth  grace  to  the  lowly.  (7)  Subject 
yourselves  therefore  to  God ;  and  stand  firm  against 
Satan,  and  he  will  flee  from  you,  (8)  Draw  nigh 
to  God,  and  he  will  draw  nigh  to  you.  Cleanse 
your  hands,  ye  sinners:  sanctify  your  hearts,  ye 
divided  in  mind.  (9)  Humble  yourselves,  and 
mourn :  let  your  laughter  be  turned  into  mourning, 
and  your  joy  into  grief.     (10)  Humble  yourselves 


9 
10 


12 


18 


..  «  >     ,  Ae  V( 

before  the  Lord,  and  he  will  exalt  you.— (11)  Speak  11 
not  against  each  other,  my  brethren ;  for  he  that 
speaketh  against  his  brother,  or  iudgeth  his  brother, 
speaketh  against  the  law,  ana  judgeth  the  law. 
And  if  thou  judgest  the  law,  thou  art  not  a  doer 
of  the  law,  but  its  judge.  (12)  There  is  one  Law- 
giver and  Judge,  who  can  maJce  alive,^  and  [can] 
destroy :  but  who  art  thou,  that  thou  judgest  thy 
neighbor  ? 

But  what  shall  we  say  of  those,  who  say :  To-day 
or  to-morrow  we  will  go  to  such  or  such  a  city,  and 
will  abide  there  a  year;  and  we  will  traffic,  and 
get  gain  ?  (14)  And  they  know  not  what  will  be  14 
to-morrow :  for  what  is  our  life,  but  an  exhalation 
that  is  seen  a  little  while,  and  then  vanisheth  and  is 
gone?  (15)  Whereas  they  should  sajr:  If  the 
Lord  please,  and  we  live,  we  will  do  this  or  that. 
(16)  They  glory  in  their  vaunting.  All  such 
glorying  is  evil.  (17)  He  that  knoweth  the  good, 
and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  is  sin. — (V.)  0  ye  rich 
ones,  wail  and  weep,  on  account  of  the  miseries 
that  are  coming  upon  you.  (2)  For  your  wealth  is 
spoiled  and  putrid ;  and  your  garments  are  moth- 
eaten  :  (8)  and  your  gold  and  your  silver  have  con- 
tracted rust:  and  the  rust  of  them  will  be  testimony 


16 

16 
17 
V. 


3 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JAMBS,    V. 

against  you;  and  it  will  eat  your  flesh.    Ye  have 
heaped  up  a  fire  to  you  against  the  latter  days. 

4  (4)  behold,  the  wages  of  the  laborers  who  have 
reaped  your  ground,  which  ye  have  wrongfiilly  re- 
tained, crieth  out ;  and  the  clamor  of  the  reapers 
hath  entered  the  ears  of  the  Lord  of  Sabaoth. 

5  (5)  For  ye  have  lived  in  pleasure  on  the  earth,  and 
revelled,  and  feasted  youiv  bodies  fis  in  a  day  of 

6  slaughter.  (6)  Ye  have  condemned  and  slain  the 
just,  and  none  resisted  you. 

7  But,  my  brethren,  be  ye  patient  until  the  advent 
of  the  Lord ;  like  the  husbandman,  who  waiteth  for 
the  precious  fruits  of  his  ground,  and  is  patient  as 
to  tnem,  until  he  receive  the  early  and  the  latter 

8  rain.  (8)  So  also  be  ye  patient,  and  fortify  your 
hearts ;  for  the  advent  of  our  Lord  draweth  nigh. 

9  — (9)  Be  not  querulous^  one  against  another,  my 
brethren,  lest  ye  be  judged :  for  lo,  the  judgment 

10  standeth  before  the  door.  (10)  For  patience  in 
your  afflictions,  my  brethren,  tsJce  to  you  the  ex- 
ample of  the  prophets,  who  spoke  in  the  name  of 

11  the  Lord.  (11)  For  lo,  we  ascribe  blessedness  to 
them  who  have  borne  sufferinff.  Ye  have  heard  of 
the  patience  of  Job ;  and  ye  have  seen  the  result 
which  the  Lord  wrought  for  him :  for  the  Lord  is 
merciful  and  compassionate. 

12  But  above  all  things,  my  brethren,  swear  ye  not; 
neither  by  heaven,  nor  by  the  earth,  nor  by  any 
other  oath :  but  let  your  language  be  yes,  yes,  and 
no,  no ;  lest  ye  become  obnoxious  to  judgment 

18  And  if  any  of  you  shall  be  in  affliction,  let  him 
pray;  or  if  he  be  joyous,  let  him  sing  psalms. 

14  (14)  And  if  one  is  sick,  let  him  call  for  the  elders** 
of  the  church;  and  let  them  pray  for°  him,  and 
anoint  him  with  oil  in  the  name  of  our  Lord : 

16  (15)  and  the  prayer  of  faith  will  heal  him  who  is 
sicK,  and  our  Lord  will  raise  him  up ;  and  if  sins 
have  been  committed  by  him,  they  will  be  forgiven 

16  him.  (16)  And  confess  ye  vour  faults  one  to  another, 
and  pray  ye  one  for  another,  that  ye  may  be  heal- 
ed ;  for  great  is  the  efficacy  of  the  prayer  which  a 

17  righteous  man  prayeth.  (17)  Elijah  also  was  a 
man  of  sensations  like  us,  and  he  prayed  that  rain 
might  not  descend  upon  the  earth ;  and  it  descended 

18  not,  for  three  years  and  six  months.  (18)  And 
again  he  prayed,  and  the  heavens  gave  rain,  and 


419 


■  Sy. 
Gr. 


^Sj.XmIm^ 


«   or,  over  him. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


420 


1  PETER,  L 


Or. 


the  earth  gave  forth  its  fruits. — (19)  My  brethren^  19 
if  one  of  jou  err  from  the  way  of  truth,  and  any 
one  convert  him  from  his  error;    (20)    let  him  20 
know,  that  he  who  tumeth  the  sinner  from  the 
error  of  his-way,  will  resuscitate*  his  soul  from 
deaUi,  and  will  cover  the  multitude  of  his  sins. 

End  of  (he  EpMe  cf  James^  (he  L^aU, 


^  )^]o    ^vSn>    l»n\»    «fiDo^^>    lili^   «oo2. 

Again; 
The  Epistle  of  Peter,  tlie  Legate ;  Simon  Geplias. 


By. 


*»  Gh-.  salvation. 


«   Gt»  scUvation. 


Peter,  a  legate  of  Jesus  the  Messiah, — to  the 
elect  and  sojourners,  who  are  dispersed  in  Pontus, 
and  in  Galatia,  and  in  Oappadocia,  and  in  Asia,  and 
in  Bithynia,— (2)  to  them  who  have  been  chosen, 
by  the  foreknowledge  of  God  the  Father,  through 
sanctification  of  the  Spirit,  unto  the  obedience  and 
the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  the  Messiah: 
— May  grace  and  peace  abound  towards  vou. 

Blessed  be  God,  the  Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  who  in  his  great  mercy  hath  begotten*  us 
anew,  by  the  resurrection  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  to  the  hope  of  life,  (4)  and  to  an  inherit- 
ance incorruptible,  undefiled,  and  unfading,  which 
is  prepared  for  you  in  heaven ;  (5)  while  ve  are 
kept,  by  the  power  of  God  and  by  feith,  for  the 
life*>  that  is  prepared  and  will  be  revealed  in  the 
last  times ;  (6)  wherein  ye  will  rejoice  for  ever,  not- 
withstanding ye  at  the  present  time  are  pressed  a 
little,  bv  the  various  trials  that  pass  over  you; 
(7)  so  that  the  proof  of  your  faith  may  appear  more 
precious  than  refined  gold  that  is  tested  by  fire, 
unto  glory  and  honor  and  praise,  at  the  manifesta- 
tion of  Jesus  the  Messiah :  (8)  whom  having  not 
seen,  ye  love ;  and  in  the  faith  of  whom  ye  rejoice, 
with  joy  that  is  glorious  and  inefl&ble,  (9)  that  ye 
may  receive  the  recompense  of  your  faith,  the 
life©  of  your  souls ;  (10)  that  life  [namely],  about 


10 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  PETER,   I. 


421 


which  the  prophets  inquired,   when    they  were 
prophesying  of  the  grace  which  was  to  be  given 

11  to  you.  (11)  And  they  searched  for  the  time, 
which  the  Spirit  of  the  Messiah  dwelling  in  them 
did  show  and  testify,  when  the  suflferings  of  the 
Messiah  were  to  occur,  and  his  subsequent  glory. 

12  (12)  And  it  was  revealed  to  theni,  [in  regard  to] 
all  they  were  searching,  that,^  not  for  themselves 
were  they  inquiring,  but  for  us  they  were  prophe- 
sying of  those  things,  which  are  now  manifested  to 
you  by  means  of  the  things  we  have  announced  to 
you,  by  the  Holy  Spirit  sent  from  heaven;  which 
things  the  angels  also  desire  to  look  into. 

18  Wherefore,  gird  up  the  loins  of  your  minds,  and 
be  awake  perfectly,  and  wait  for  the  joy,  which  will 
come  to  you  at  the  revelation  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 

14  Messiah,  (14)  as  obedient  children :  and  be  ye  not 
conversant  again  with  those  former  lusts,  with 

15  which  ye  lusted  when  without  knowledge.  (15)  But 
be  ye  holy  in  all  your  conduct,  as  he  is  holy  who 

16  hatn  called  you.    (16)  Because  it  is  written:  Be 

17  ye  holy,  even  as  I  am  holy.  (17)  And  if  so  be  ye 
call  on  the  Father, — with  whom  is  no  respect  of 

Sersons,  and  who  judgeth  every  one  according  to  his 
eeds,— pass  the  time  of  your  sojoumment  with 

18  fear ;  (18)  since  ye  know,  that  neither  with  perish- 
able silver,  nor  with  gold,  ye  were  redeemed  from 
your  vain  doings,  which  ye  had  by  tradition  from 

19  your  fethers ;  (19)  but  with  the  precious  blood  of 
that  Lamb  in  which  is  no  spot  nor  blemish,  namely, 

20  the  Messiah :  (20)  who  was  predestined  to  this,  lie- 
fore  the  foundation  of  the  world ;  and  was  mani 
fested  at  the  termination  of  the  times,  for  your 

21  sakes ;  (21)  who,  by  means  of  him,  have  believed 
in  God,  who  raised  him  from  the  dead  and  confer- 
red glory  on  him ;  that  your  faith  and  hope  might 

22  be  in  God,  (22)  while  your  minds  became  sancti- 
fied, by  obedience  to  the  truth ;  and  ye  be  full  of 
love,  without  respect  of  persons,  so  that  ye  love  one 

28  another  out  of  a  pure  and  perfect  heart ;  {2S)  like 
persons  born  again,®  not  of  seed  that  perishetn,  but 
of  that  which  doth  not  perish,  by  the  living  word 

24  of  God,  who  abideth  for  ever.  (24)  Because  all 
flesh  is  as  grass,  and  all  its  beauty  like  the  flower 
of  the  field.    The  grass  drieth  up,  and  the  flower 

26  withereth  away;  (25)  but  the  word  of  our  God 


^    or,  because. 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


422 


1  PETER,   11. 


'^Sy.,  iVlifD 


6 


ftbideth  for  ever:  and  this  is  the  word  that  is  an- 
nounced to  you, — (n.)  Therefore,  cease  ye  fix)m  all  H 
malice,  and  all  guile,  and  hypocrisy,  and  envy,  and 
backbiting.    (2)  And  be  like  infant  children ;  and    2 
crave  the  woto^  as  bein^  the  pure  spiritual  milk 
by  which  ye  are  nourished  up  to  life ;  (8)  if  ye    8 
have  tasted  and  seen  that  the  Lord  is  good :   (4)  to    4 
whom  ye  have  come,  because  he  is  a  living  stone, 
rejected  indeed  by  men,  but  with  God  elect  and  pre- 
cious.  (5)  And  ye  also,  as  living  stones,  are  builded    5 
and  become  spintual  temples,  and  holy  priests,  for 
the  offering  of  spiritual  sacrifices,*  acceptable  before 
God,  through  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (6)  For  it  is  said 
in  the  scripture.  Behold,  in  Zion  I  lay  a  chosen 
and  precious  stone,  for  the  head  of  the  comer; 
and  whoever  believeth  in  him,  will  not  be  ashamed. 
(7)  On  you  therefore  who   believe,  is  this  honor    7 
conferred :  but  to  them  who  believe  not,  (8)  he  is  a    8 
stone  of  stumbling  and  a  rock  of  offence.    And 
they  stumble  at  it,  because  they  believe  not  the 
word:  whereto  they  were  appointed.**   (9)  But  ye    9 
are  an  elect  race,  omciatiag  as  priests  of  the  king- 
dom;  a  holy  people,  a  redeemed  congregation; 
that  ye  should  proclaim  the  praises  of  him  who 
oallea  you  out  of  darkness  to  his  precious  light: 
(10)  who  formerly  were  not  accounted  a  people,  but  10 
now  are  the  people  of  God ;  and  also,  there  were 
[once]  no  mercies  on  you,  but  now  mercies  are 
poured  out  upon  you. 

My  beloved,  I  entreat  you  as  strangers  and  pil-  11 
grims,  separate  yourselves  fix)m  all  lusts  of  the 
body;  for  they  war  against  the  souL  (12)  And 
let  your  behavior  be  (fecorous  before  all  men ;  so 
that  they  who  utter  evil  speeches  against  you,  may 
see  your  good  actions,  and  may  praise  God  in  the 
day  of  trial. — (13)  And  be  ye  submissive  to  all  the  18 
sons  of  men,  for  God's  sake ; — to  kings,  on  account 
of  their  authority ;  (14)  and  to  judges,  because  they  14 
are  sent  by  him  for  the  punishment  of  offenders, 
and  for  the  praise  of  them  that  do  well.  (15)  For 
so  is  the  pleasure  of  God,  that  by  your  good  deeds 
ye  may  stop  the  mouth  of  the  foolish,  who  know 
not  God :  (16)  as  free  men,  yet  not  like  men  who 
make  their  fi^eedom  a  cloak  for  their  wickedness, 
but  as  the  servants  of  God.  (17)  Honor  all  men ; 
love  your  brethren ;  fear  God ;  and  honor  kings. 


12 


16 


16 
17 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   PETER,   IIL 


423 


18 


19 


And  those  among  you  who  are  servants,  be  sub- 
ject to  your  masters,**  with  reverence ;  not  only  to 
the  good  and  gentle,  but  also  to  the  harsh  and 
morose.  (19)  For  there  is  favor  before  God  for 
them  who,  for  the  sake  of  a  good  conscience,  en- 
dure sorrows  that  come  upon  them  wrongfully. 

20  (20J  But  they  who  endure  afflictions  on  account  of 
their  offences,  what  praise  have  they  ?  But  if,  when 
ye  do  well,  they  vex  you,  and  ye  endure  it;  then 

21  great  is  your  praise  with  God.  (21)  For  unto  this 
were  ye  called ;  because  the  Messiah  also  died  for 
us,  and  left  us  this  pattern,  that  ye  should  walk  in 

22  his  stej)s.    (22)  He  did  no  sin ;  neither  was  guile 
28  found  in  his  mouth.     (23J  When  he  was  reviled, 

he  reviled  not ;  and  he  suffered  and  threatened  not, 
but  committed  his  cause  to  the  Judge  of  righteous 

24  ness.  (24)  And  he  took  away^  all  our  sins,  and, 
in  his  body,  lifted  them  to  the  cross ;  that  we,  when 
dead  to  sm,  might  live  by  his  righteousness:  for 

26  by  his  wounds,  ye  are  healed.  (25)  For  ye,  [once] 
went  astray,  like  sheep;  but  ye  have  now  returned 
to  the  Shepherd  and  uurator®  of  your  souls. 

HL    So  also  ye  wives,  be  ye  subject  to  your  hus- 
bands; that,  by  your  pleasing  behavior,  ye  may 
Sin  over,  without  difficulty,  those  who  obey  not 
e  word,  (2)  when  they  see,  that  ye  conduct  your- 
8  selves  with  reverence  and  chastity.    (3)  And  adorn 
not  yourselves  with  the  external  ornaments  of  curls 
of  the  hair,  or  of  golden  trinkets,  or  of  costly  gar- 
4  ments.     (4)  But  adorn  yourselves  in  the  hidden 
person  of  the  heart,*  with  a  mild  and  uncorrupted 
spirit,  an  ornament  that  is  precious  before  God. 
6  ^6)  For  so  also  the  holy  women  of  old,  who  trusted 
in  God,  adorned  themselves,  and  were  subject  to 

6  their  husbands:  (6)  just  as  Sarah  was  subject  to 
Abraham,  and  called  him.  My  lord:  whose  daugh- 
ters ye  are,  by  good  works,  while  ye  are  not  terri- 

7  fied  by  any  fear. — (7)  And  ye  husbands,  likewise, 
dwell  with  your  wives  according  to  knowledge; 
and  hold  them  in  honor,  as  the  feebler  vessels ;  be- 
cause they  also  will  inherit  with  you  the  gift  of 
eternal  life  f  and  let  not  your  prayers  be  hindered. 

8  The  summing  up,*>  is,  that  ye  all  be  in  harmony, 
that  ye  be  sympathetic  with  them  who  suffer,  and 
affectionate  one  to  another,  and  be  merciftd  and 


Sy.  to  your 
lords. 


«»Sy.  ^\aj» 


Sy. 

Gr.  Mdnnte^ 


Sy  )ol? 


Sy.  ]Sq1ic 


Digitized  by 


Google 


484 


1  PETER,   IV. 


BOina:  ihe. 


6r.  ioved, 
^  Grr.  saved, 

'  Sy. 


kind.    (9)  And  that  je  reoompense  to  no  one  eyil    9 
for  evil,  neither  railing  for  railing;  butj  in  oontra- 
riety  to  these,  that  ye  bless:  for  to  this  were  ye 
called,  that  ye  might  inherit  a  blessing.  (10)  There-  10 
fore,  whoever  chooseth  life,  and  desireth  to  see  good 
days,  let  him  keep  his  ton^e  from  evil,  and  his 
lips  that  they  speak  no  guile;   (11)  let  him  turn  11 
away  from  evil,  and  do  good ;  let  him  seek  peace, 
and  follow  after  it.    f  12)  Because  the  eyes  of  the  12 
Lord  are  upon  the  righteous,  and  his  ears  [ready] 
to  hear  them :  but  the  face  of  the  Lord  is  against 
the  wicked.    (18)  And  who  will  do  you  hann,  if  IS 
ye  are  zealous  of  good  works?     (14)   But  if  it  14 
should  occur,  that  ye  suffer  on  account  of  righteous- 
ness, happv  are  ye.    And  be  not  terrified,  by  those 
who  woula  terrify  you,  nor  be  agitated:  (15)  but  16 
sanctiftr  the  Lord  the  Messiah,  in  ^our  hearts. 

And  be  ye  ready  for  a  vindication,  before  every 
one  who  demandeth  of  you  an  account  of  the  hope 
of  yourc  faith,  (16)  in  meekness  and  respect,  as  16 
having  a  good  conscience ;  so  that  they  who  speak 
against  you  as  bad  men,  may  be  ashamed,  for  nav- 
ing  calumniated  your  good  conduct  in  the  Messiah. 

(17)  For  it  is  profitable  to  jrou,  that  ye  suffer  evil  17 
while  ve  do  good  deeds,  if  this  should  be  the  pleas- 
ure of  Qtod ;   and  not,  while  ye  do  evil  deeds. 

(18)  For  the  Messiah  also  once  died  for  our  sins,  18 
the  righteous  for  sinners ;  that  he  might  bring  you 

to  God.    And  he  died  in  body,  but  lived  in  spirit. 

(19)  And  he  preached  to  those  souls,  which  were  19 
detained  in  Hades,^  (20)  which  were  formerly  dis-  20 
obedient,  in  the  days  of  Noah,  when  the  long  suf- 
fering of  God  commanded  an  ark  to  be  made,  in 
hope  of  their  repentance ;  and  eight  souls  only  en- 
tered into  it,  and  were  kept  alive®  in  the  waters. 
(21)  And  ye  also,  by  a  like  figure,  are  made  alive^  21 
by  baptism, «  (not  when  ye  wash  your  bodies  from 
filth,  but  when  ye  confess  Gt>d  with  a  pure  con- 
science,) and  by  the  resurrection  of  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah ;  (22)  who  is  taken  up  to  heaven,  and  is  on  22 
the  right  hand  of  God,  and  angels,  and  authorities, 
and  powers,  are  subject  to  him. — (fV.)  If  then  the  IV. 
Messiah  hath  suffered  for  you  in  the  flesh,  do  ye 
also  arm  yourselves  with  the  same  mind :  for  every 
one  that  is  dead  in  his  body,  hath  ceased  from  aU 
sins,  (2)  that  he  may  no  longer  be  alive  to  the  2 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  PETER,   IV. 


426 


lusts  of  men,  while  he  is  in  the  body,  but  [only]  to 
S  do  the  pleasure  of  God.  (8)  For  the  time  that  is 
past  was  enough,  when  ye  wrought  the  pleasure  of 
the  profene,*  in  dissoluteness,  and  in  ebriety,  and 
in  lasdviousness,  and  in  revelling,  and  in  the  wor- 

4  ship  of  demons.  (4)  And  lo,  they  now  wonder, 
ana  reproach  you,  because  ye  revel  not  with  them 

5  in  the  same  former  dissoluteness;  (5)  who  must 
give  account  to  God,  who  is  to  judge  the  living  and 

6  the  dead.  (6)  For  on  this  account  the  announce* 
ment  is  made  also  to  the  dead,  that  they  may  be 
judged  as  persons  in  the  flesh,  and  may  live  accord* 
ing  to  God  in  the  spirit 

7  But  the  end  of  all  things  ^proacheth:  therefore 

8  be  sober,  and  be  wakeful  for  prayer.  (8)  And 
above  all  things,  have  fervent  love  one  towards 

9  another;  for  love  covereth  a  multitude  of  sins.  (9) 
And  be  ye  compassionate  to  strangers,  without 

10  murmuring.  (10)  And  let  each  of  you  minister  to 
his  associates,  the  gift  which  he  hath  received  fix)m 
God ;  as  being  good  stewards  of  the  manifold  grace 

11  of  God.  (11)  Whoever  will  speak,  let  him  speak 
as  the  word  of  God :  and  whoever  will  minister,** — 
as  of  the  ability  that  God  hath  given  him :  so  that 
in  all  ye  do,  God  may  be  glorined,  through  Jesus 
the  Messiah ;  to  whom  belongeth  glory,  and  honor, 
for  ever  and  ever.     Amen. 

12  My  beloved,  be  not  dismayed  at  the  trials  that 
befall  you,  as  if  some  strange  thing  had  come  upon 

18  you ;  lor  these  things  are  for  your  probation.  (18) 
But  rejoice,  that  ye  participate  in  the  sufferings  or 
the  Messiah,  that  so  ye  may  also  rejoice  and  exult 

14  at  the  revelation  of  his  glory.  (14)  And  if  ye  are 
reproached  on  account  of  the  name  of  the  Messiah, 
happy  are  ye:  for  the  glorious  Spirit  of  God  resteth 

16  upon  you.     (15)  Only  let  none  of  you  suffer,  as  a 

16  murderer,  or  as  a  thie^  or  as  an  evil-doer.  (16) 
But  if  he  suffer  as  a  Christian,^  let  him  not  be 
ashamed ;  but  let  him  glorify  God  on  account  of 

17  this  name.  (17)  For  it  is  the  time  when  judgment 
will  commence  with  the  house  of  God :  and  if  it 
commence  with  us,  what  will  be  the  end  of  those 

18  who-  obey  not  the  gospel  of  God  ?  (18)  And  if  the 
righteous  scarcely  liveth,<»  where  will  the  ungodly 

19  and  the  sinner  be  found! — (19)  Wherefore,  let 
them  who  suffer  according  to  the  pleasure  of  Gk)d, 


aSy.  I^lLm 


^Sy. 


*  6r.  tfl  Moved, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


426 


1  PETER,   V. 


*  Sy.  hygood 
deedi. 


^Sy. 


Qj 


«8y. 


a  laO 


Sy.U^ 


•%.|^>a:^1 


Sy,^inn 


2 


commend  their  soals  to  him  in  well  doing,®  as  to  a 
faithful  Creator. 

And  I,  an  Elder,  ^  jour  associate,  and  a  witness  V 
of  the  sufferings  of  the  Messiah,  and  a  participator 
in  his  glory  which  is  to  be  revealed, — entreat  the 
Elders**  who  are  among  you: — (2)  Feed  ye  the 
flock  of  God  which  is  committed  to  you :  have  care 
[for  it],  spiritually;  not  from  compulsion,  but 
voluntarily ;  not  for  base  gain,  but  with  all  your 
heart;  (8)  not  as  lords  of  £e  flock,  but  so  as  to  be 
a  good  example  for  them:  (4)  that  when  the  chief 
shepherd  shall  be  revealed,  ye  may  receive  from 
him  a  crown  of  glory  that  fadeth  not. — (6)  And  ye 
juniors  submit  yourselves  to  your  seniors*;  and 
clothe  yourselves,  stringently,  with  lowliness  of 
mind  one  towards  another;  because  Qod  resisteth 
them  who  exalt  themselves,  and  giveth  grace  to 
the  humble.  (6)  Humble  yoursdves,  therefore, 
under  the  powerful  hand  of  6od :  and  it  will  exalt 
you  in  due  time.  (7)  And  cast  all  your  solicitude 
upon  God;  for  he  careth  for  you.  (8)  Be  sober 
and  guarded,  because  Satan^  your  adversary,  like 
a  lion,  roareth,  and  goeth  about,  and  seeketh  whom 
he  may  devour.  (9)  Therefore  resist  him,  being 
steadfast  in  the  faim :  and  know  ye,  that  the  same 
sufferings  befall  your  brethren  that  are  in  the 
world. 

Now  it  is  the  God  of  grace,  who  hath  called  us  10 
to  his  eternal  glory  by  Jesus  the  Messiah,  that  hath 
given  us,  while  we  sustain  these  light  afflictions,  to 
be  strengthened,  and  confirmed,  and  established  by 
him  for  ever :  (11)  to  whom  be  glory,  and  power,  H 
and  honor,  for  ever  and  ever.    Amen. 

These  as  I  account  [them]  few  [things],®  I  have  12 
written  to  you  by  Sylvanus,  a  faithml  brother. 
And  I  would  persuade,  and  would  testify,  that  this 
is  the  true  grace  of  God, — this  in  which  ye  stand. 
— (18)  The  elect  church  which  is  in  Babylon,^  sa-  18 
luteth  you;  also  Mark,  my  son.    (14)  balute  ye  14 
one  another  with  a  holy  kiss. — ^Peace  be  with  you 
all,  who  are  in  the  Me^iah.     Amen. 

End  of  the  first  EpuOe  cf  Peter  the  Legate. 


9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


The  Second  Epistle  of  Peter. 


Simon  Peter,  a  servant  and  legate  of  Jesas  the 
Messiah, — ^to  those  who  have  obtained  equally  pre- 
cious faith  with  us,  through  the  righteousness  of 

2  our  Lord  and  Eedeemer,  Jesus  the  Messiah ;— ^2) 
May  grace  and  peace  abound  to  you  through  the 

8  recognition*  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  (8) 
as  the  giver  to  us  of  all  things  that  be  of  the 
power  of  God,  unto  life  and  the  fear  of  God,  through 
the  recognition  of  him  who  hath  called  us  unto  his 

4  own  glory  and  moral  excellence:  (4)  wherein  he 
hath  given  you  very  great  ai\d  precious  promises ; 
that  by  them  ye  might  become  partakers  of  the 
nature  of  God,  while  ye  flee  from  the  corruptions 

5  of  the  lusts  that  are  in  the  world.  (5)  And,  while 
ye  apply**  all  diligence  in  the  matter,  add  to  your 
faith  moral  excellence;  and  to  moral  excellence, 

6  knowledge ;°  (6)  and  to  knowledge,  perseverance ; 
and  to  perseverance,  patience ;  and  to  patience,  the 

7  fear  of  God ;  (7)  and  to  the  fear  of  God,  sympathy 
with  the  brotherhood ;  and  to  sympathy  with  the 

8  brotherhood,  love.  (8)  For,  while  tnese  are  found 
in  you,  and  abounding,  they  render  you  not  sloth- 
ful, and  not  unfruitful,  in  the  recognition  of  our 

9  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah.  (9)  For  he,  in  whom 
these  things  are  not  found,  is  blind  and  seeth  not, 
and  hath  forgotten  the  purgation  of  his  former  sins. 

10  (10)  And  therefore,  my  brethren,  be  ye  exceedingly 
diligent  to  make  your  calling  and  election  sure,^ 
hy  your  good  actions:   for,  by  so  doing,  ye  will 

11  never  fall  away.  (11)  For  thus  will  entrance  be 
given  vou  abundantly,  into  the  everlasting  king- 
dom of  our  Lord  and  Eedeemer  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

12  And  for  this  reason  I  am  not  wearied  in  remind- 
iiigyou  continually  of  these  things;  although  ye 
know  them  well,  and  are  established  in  this  truth. 

18  (18)  And  it  seemeth  right  to  me,  so  long  as  T  am 


or,  acknowl- 


^  Sy.  introduee 
*  or,  inUUu 
genee. 


'Sy.}l3^MiD 


Digitized  by 


Google 


428 


a  PETER,  IL 


*  Some  eopies: 
atriveye. 


arnnexpon- 
tar.* 


ftSy.jnjlD^l 


in  this  body,  to  excite  you  by  monition ;  (14)  since  14 
I  know,  that  the  demise  of  my  body  is  speedy,  as 
also  my  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  showed  me. 
(15)  And  I  am  anxious,®  that,  after  my  departure,  15 
ye  too  may  have  it  always  with  you  to  make  men- 
tion of  these  things.    (16)  For  we  have  not  gone  16 
after  febles  artfully  firamed,  in  making  known  to 

iou  the  power  and  advent  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the 
[essiah ;  but  [it  was]  afker  we  had  been  spectators 
of  his  majestv.    (17)  For,  when  he  received  from  17 
God  the  Father  honor  and  glory,  and,  after  the 
splendid  glory  of  his  majesty,  a  voice  came  to  him, 
tnus:  This  is  my  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well 
pleased;   (18)  we  also  heard  this  identical  voice  18 
from  heaven,  which  came  to  him  while  we  were 
with  him  in  the  holy  mount     (19)  And  we  have  19 
moreover  a  sure  word  of  prophecy ;  and  ye  will  do 
well,  if  ye  look  to  it  as  to  a  light  that  shineth  in  a 
da^k  place,  until  the  day  shall  dawn,  and  the  sun 
shall  arise  in  your  hearts ;  (20)  ye  having  the  j)re-  20 
vious  knowledge,  that  no  prophecy  is  an  exposition 
of  its  own  text.^    (21)  For  at  no  time  was  it  by  the  21 
pleasure  of  man,  that  the  prophecy  came ;  but  holy 
men  of  God  spoke,  as  they  were  moved  by  the  Holy 
Spirit  f.     ,         .  y 

But  in-the-werld;^  there  have  been  also  false  pro-  IL 
phets,  as  there  will  likewise  be  &lse  teachers  among 
you,  who  will  bring  in  destructive  heresies,*  deny- 
ing the  Lord  that  bought  them ;  thus  bringing  on 
themselves  swift  destruction.    (2)  And  many  will    2 
JO  after  their  profeneness;  on  account  of  whom, 
the  way  of  trutn  will  be  reproached.    (8)  And,  in     3 
the   cupidity   of  raving  words,  they   will   make 
merchandise  of  you : — whose  judgment,  of  a  long 
time,  is  not  idle ;  and  their  destruction  slumbereth 
not     (4)  For,  if  God  spared  not  the  angels  that    4 
sinned,  but  cast  them  down  to  the  infernal  regions*> 
in  chains  of  darkness,  and  delivered  them  up  to  be 
kept  unto  the  judgment  of  torture,  (5)  and  spared    5 


♦  The  Ghreek  of  this  difficult  passage  reads:  itoLifa  flrpo^ijTSia  ypouprig  (hng 
i^fiKuifsoig  ou  yivsrou.  The  Syriac  requu-es  i^/Xutfiff,  for  sirikotfscae ;  and  then» 
wippoang  ypcupris  to  depend  on  iieikotfis,  it  obtains  the  significant  interpretationi 
that  no  propheey  explains  itself,  and  consequently  cannot  well  be  understood^ 
unto  its  nimllment  shall  make  it  dear. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  PETER,   II. 


429 


not  the  former  world,  but  preserved  Noah  the 
eighthc  person,  a  preacher  of  nghteousness,  when  he 

6  brought  a  flood  on  the  world  of  the  wicked;  (6) 
[and]  burned  up  the  cities  of  Sodom  and  Gomor- 
rah, and  condemned  them  by  an  overthrow,  making 
them  a  demonstration  to  tne  wicked  who  should 

7  come  after  them ;  (7)  and  also  delivered  righteous 
Lot,  who  was  tormented  with  the  filthy  conduct 

8  of  the  lawless ;  (8)— for  that  upright  man  dwelling 
among  them,  in  seeing  and  hearing  from  day  to 
day,  was  distressed  in  his  righteous  soul  by  their 

9  lawless  deeds; — (9)  the  Lord  Knoweth  how  to  res- 
cue firom  afflictions  those  who  fear  him;  and  he 
will  reserve  the  wicked  for  the  day  of  judgment  to 

10  be  tormented,  (10)  and  especially  them  who  go 
after  the  flesh  in  the  lusts  of  pollution,  and  despise 
government    Daring  and  arrogant,  they  shudder 

11  not  with  awe  while  they  blaspheme;  (11)  whereas 
angels,  greater  than  they  in  might  and  valor,  bring 

12  not  against  them  a  reproachful  denunciation.  (12) 
But  these,  like  the  dumb  beasts  that  by  nature  are 
for  slaughter  and  corruption,  while  reviling  the 
things  thev  know  not,  will  perish  in  their  own  cor- 

18  ruption ;  (18)  they  being  persons  with  whom  ini- 
yiitj  is  the  reward  of  iniquity,  and  by  them  riot- 
ing in  the  daytime  is  accounted  delightftd ;  defiled 
and  ftiU  of  spots  [are  they],  indulging  themselves 
at  their  ease,  while  they  give  themselves  up  to 

14  pleasure ;  (14)  having  eyes  that  are  full  of  adultery, 
and  sins  that  never  end ;  seducing  unstable  souk ; 
and  having  a  heart  exercised  in  cupidity ;  children 

15  of  malediction :  (15)  and,  having  left  the  way  of 
rectitude,  they  have  wandered  and  gone  in  the  way 
of  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor,  who  loved  the  wages 

16  of  iniquity,  (16)  and  who  had  for  the  reprover  of  his 
transgression  a  dumb  ass,  which,  speaking  with  the 
speech  of  men,  rebuked  the  madness  of  the  prophet. 

17  (17)  These  are  wells  without  water,  clouds  driven 
by  a  tempest,^  persons  for  whom  is  reserved  the 

18  blackness  of  darkness.  (18)  For,  while  they  utter 
astonishing^  vanity,  they  seduce,  with  obscene  lusts 
of  the  flesh,  them  who  have  almost  abandoned 

19  these  that  walk  in  error.  (19)  And  they  promise 
them  liberty,  while  they  themselves  are  the  slaves 
of  corruption :    for,  by  whatever  thing  a  man  is 

20  vanquished^  to  that  is  he  enslaved.    (20)  For  i^ 


L  e,€mcfihe 
eight  penons. 


^  Some  eopies : 
from  above. 
Some  copies : 
ridicul<ni5. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


430 


2  PETER,   IIL 


'  or,  aeknowl- 
edgtd. 


^  Sy.iniheend 
of  days. 


when  they  have  escaped  the  pollations  of  the  world 
by  the  knowledge  of  our  Lord  and  Redeemer  Jesus 
the  Messiah,  they  become  a^ain  involyed  in  the 
Bcune,  and  are  vanquished,  their  latter  state  is  worse 
than  the  former.  (21)  For  it  would  have  been  21 
better  for  them,  not  to  have  known^  the  way  of 
righteousness,  than  after  having  known  [it],  to  turn 
back  from  the  holv  commandment  that  was  deliv- 
ered to  them.  (22)  But  the  true  proverb  hath  22 
happened  to  them :  the  dog  returneth  to  his  vomit ; 
and  the  sow  that  was  washed,  to  her  wallowing  in 
the  mire. 

This  second  epistle,  my  beloved,  I  now  write  to  HL 
you:    in  [both  of]  which  I  stir  up  your  honest 
mina  by  admonition :  (2)  thai  ye  may  be  mindful    2 
of  the  words  which  were  formerly  spoken  by  the 
holy  prophets,  and  of  the  injunction  of  our  Lord 
and  Iledeemer  by  the  hand  of  the  legates:    (8)    8 
knowing  this  previously,  that  there  will  come  in 
the  last  days"  scoffers,  who  will  scofl^  walking  ac- 
cording to  their  own  lusts ;  (4t)  and  saying,  Wnere    4 
is  the  promise  of  his  coming?  for,  since  our  &thers 
fell  asleep,  every  thing  remaineth  just  as  from  the 
beginning  of  the  creation.     (6)  For  this  they  will-    5 
ingly  forget,  that  the  heavens  were  of  old ;    and 
the  earth  rose  up  from  the  waters,  and  by  means 
of  water,  by  the  word  of  God.    {&)  [And,]  by  means    6 
of  these  [waters],  the  world  whicn  then  was,  [beinff 
submerged]  again  perished  in  the  waters.  (7)  And     7 
the  heavens  that  now  are,  and  the  earth,  are  by  his 
word  stored  up,  being  reserved  for  the  fire  at  the 
day  of  judgment  and  the  perdition  of  wicked  men. 
— (8)  And  of  this  one  thinff,  my  beloved,  be  not    8 
forgetful.  That  one  day,  to  the  Lord,  is  as  a  thou- 
sand years  ;  and  a  thousand  years,  as  one  day.    (9)     9 
The  Lord  doth  not  procrastinate  his  promises,  as 
some  estimate  procrastination;  but  he  is  long  suf- 
fering, for  your  sakes,  being  not  willing  that  any 
should  perish,  but  that  every  one  should  come  to 
repentance.     (10)  And  the  day  of  the  Lord  will  10 
come,  like  a  thief;  in  which  the  heavens  will  sud- 
denly pass  away ;  and  the  elements,^  being  ignited, 
will  be  dissolved ;   and  the  earth  and  the  works 
in  it,  will  not  be  found. — (11)  As  therefore  all  these  11 
I  things  are  to  be  dissolved,  what  persons  ought  ye 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   JOHN,   1. 


431 


12  to  be,  in  bolj  conduct,  and  in  the  fear  of  God,  (12^ 
expecting  and  desiring  the  coming  of  the  day  or 
God,  in  which  the  heavens  being  tried  by  fire  will 
be  dissolved,  and  the  elements  oeing  ignited  will 

18  melt?  (18)  But  we,  according  to  his  promise, 
expect  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth,  in  which 
riAteousness  dwelleth. 

14  Therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  expect  these  thinas, 
strive  that  ye  may  be  found  by  him  in  peace,  witn- 

16  out  spot  and  without  blemish.  (15)  And  account 
the  long  suffering  of  the  Lord  to  be  redemption ; 
as  also  our  beloved  brother  Paul,  according  to  the 

16  wisdom  conferred  on  him,  wrote  to  you ;  (16)  as 
also  in  all  his  epistles,  speaking  in  them  oi  these 
things,  in  which  there  is  someuiing  difficult  to  be 
understood;  [and]  which  they  who  are  ignorant 
and  unstable,  pervert^  as  they  do  also  the  rest  of 

17  the  scriptures,  to  their  own  destruction. — (17)  Ye 
therefore,  my  beloved,  as  ye  know  [these  thmgs] 
beforehand,  guard  yourselves,  lest,  by  going  after 
the  error  of  the  lawless,  ye  fall  from  your  steadfast- 

18  ness.  (18)  But  be  ye  growing  in  grace,  and  in  the 
knowledge  of  our  Lora  and  Kedeemer  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  and  of  God  the  Father :  whose  is  the  glory, 
now,  and  always,  and  to  the  days  of  eternity.® 
Amen. 

End  cf  the  second  EpuUe  cf  Peter  the  Legate, 


Sy^lLo^ 


Again: 
The  Epistle  of  Jolin  the  Legate. 


I,  We  announce  to  you  that,  which  was  from  the 
beginning,  which  we  have  heard,  and  have  seen 
with  our  eyes,  looked  upon,  and  handled  with  our 

2  hands,  that  which  is  the  word  of  life.*  (2)  And 
the  life  was  manifested,  and  we  have  seen  and  do 
testify  and  announce  to  you,  the  life  which  is  eter- 
nal ;  which  was  with  the  Father,  and  was  revealed 


»  Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


432 


1  JOHN,   II. 


Gr. 

bSy.lAfiDOM 


to  us.    (8)  And  what  we  have  seen  and  heard^  we    3 
make  known  to  you  also,  that  ye  may  have  fellow- 
ship with  us ;  and  our  fellowship  is  with  the  Fa- 
ther, and  with  his  Son  Jesus  the  Messiah.    (4)  And    4 
these  things  we  write  to  you,  that  our  joy  m  you 
may  be  comi)lete. 

And  this  is  the  announcement,  which  we  have    6 
heard  from  him  and  declare  to  you,  that  God  is 
light|  and  no  darkness  at  all  is  in  him.    (6)  And    6 
if  we  say  that  we  have  fellowship  with  him,  and  we 
walk  in  the  darkness,  we  are  liars,  and  walk  not  in 
the  truth.     (7)  But  if  we  walk  in  the  light,  as  he    7 
is  in  the  light,  we  have  fellowship  with  each  other, 
and  the  bK)od  of  Jesus  his  Son  deanseth  us  from 
all  our  sins. — (8)  And  if  we  say  that  we  have  no    8 
sin,  we  deceive  ourselves,  and  the  truth  is  not  in 
us.    1^9)  But  if  we  confess  our  sins,  he  is  Mthfol    9 
and  ngnteous,  to  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  to  cleanse 
us  from  all  our  iniquitv.    ^10)  K  we  say  that  we  10 
have  not  sinned,  we  make  hun  a  liar,  and  his  word 
is  not  with  us. 

My  children,  these  things  I  write  to  you,  that  ye  EL 
sin  not.    But  if  any  one  should  sin,  we  have  an 
Advocate*  with  the  Father,  Jesus  the  Messiah,  the 
righteous.    (2)  For  he  is  himself  the  propitiation**     2 
for  our  sins ;  and  not  for  ours  only,  but  also  for  all 
the  world.— (3)  And  by  this  we  shall  be  sensible    8 
that  we  know  him,  if  we  keep  his  commandments. 
(4)  For  he  that  saith,  I  know  him,  and  doth  not    4 
keep  his  commandments,  is  a  liar,  and  the  truth  is 
not  in  him.     (6)  But  he  that  keepeth  his  word,  in    5 
him  is  the  love  of  God  truly  completed:  for  by  this 
we  know  that  we  are  in  him.     (6)  He  that  saith,     6 
I  am  in  him,  is  bound  to  walk  according  to  his 
walkings. — (7)  My  beloved,  I  write  no  new  com-    7 
mandment  to  you,  but  the  old  commandment  which 
ye  had  from  the  beginning;  and  the  old  command- 
ment is  the  word,  wnich  ye  have  heard.   (8)  Again,     8 
a  new  commandment  I  write  to  you,  whicn  is  true 
in  him  and  in  you;   because  the  darkness  hath 
passed  away,  and  the  true  light  beginneth  to  ap- 
pear.   (9)  W  hoever  therefore  shall  say  that  he  is    9 
m  the  light,  and  hateth  his  brother,  is  in  darkness 
until  now.    (10)  He  that  loveth  his  brother,  abi-  10 
deth  in  the  light,  and  m  him  is  no  stumbling 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   JOHN,   II. 


433 


11 


12 


U 


15 
16 


17 


But  he  that  hatefh  his  brother,  is  in  darkness, 

ana  walketh  in  darkness;    and  he  knoweth  not 

whither  he  goeth,  because  the  darkness  hath  blinded 

his  eyes. 

I  write  to  you,  ye  children,  because  your  sins 

18  are  forgiven  you  for  his  name's  sake.  (13)  I  write 
to  you,  ye  fathers,  because  ye  have  known  him 
who  existed  from  the  beginning.  I  write  to  you, 
ye  young  men,  because  ye  have  vanquished  the 
evil  one.®  (14)  I  have  vrritten  to  you,  ye  little 
ones,  because  ye  have  known  the  Father.  I  have 
written  to  you,  ye  fathers,  because  ye  have  known 
him  who  [was]  from  the  beginning.  I  have  written 
to  you,  ye  young  men,  because  ye  are  strong,  and 
the  word  of  God  dwelleth  in  you,  and  ye  have  van- 
quished the  evil  one.  (15)  Love  not  the  world, 
nor  any  thing  in  it ;  for  whoever  loveth  the  world, 
hath  not  the  love  of  the  Father  in  him.  (16)  For 
all  that  is  in  the  world,  is,  the  lust  of  the  body,  and 
the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  the  world; 
which  are  not  from  the  Father,  but  from  the  world 
itself  (17^  And  the  world  is  passing  away,  [both] 
it  and  the  lust  thereof;  but  he  that  doeth  the  pleas- 

18  ure  of  God,  abideth  for  ever. — (18)  My  children, 
it  is  the  latter  time ;  and  as  ye  have  heard  that  a 
felse  Messiah^  was  to  arise,  so  there  are  now  many 
false  Messiahs ;«  and  from  this  we  know  that  it  is 
the  latter  time.  (19)  From  us  they  went  out,  but 
they  were  not  of  us ;  for  if  they  had  been  of  us, 
they  would  have  continued  with  us :  but  they  went 
out  from  us,  that  so  it  might  be  known,  that  they 
were  not  of  us.  (20)  But  ye  have  an  unction*"  from 
the  Holy  [One] ;  and  ye  discriminate  every  per- 
son. (21)  I  have  not  written  to  you,  because  ye 
know  not  the  truth,  but  because  ye  know  it,  and 
because  no  falsehood  is  of  the  truth.  (22)  Who  is 
&lse,  but  he  that  denieth  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah  ? 
And  thatperson  is  a  false  Messiah.  He  that  deni 
eth  the  lather,  denieth  also  the  Son.  (23)  Ani 
he  that  denieth  the  Son,  also  believeth  not  the 
Father.     He  that  confesseth  the  Son,  confesseth 

24  also  the  Father.  (24)  And  what  ye  heard  from 
the  first,  let  that  remain  with  you.  For  if  that, 
which  ye  heard  from  the  first,  remaineth  with  you, 
ye  also  will  remain  in  the  Father  and  in  the  Son, 

26  (25)  And  this  is  the  promise,  which  he  hath  prom- 


19 


20 
21 


23 


«y    ]  ^  ^  #^ 


Sy.- 

•Sy.         ^ 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


434 


1   JOHN,   IIL 


K  or,  t^. 


dtnee. 


*  L  e.  like  MeS' 
tiah. 

^  Sy.  lla^ 


'%  ]<  5*^ 


Sf.jl-ZV 


ifled  us,  [even]  life  eteraal.  (26)  And  these  things  26 
I  have  written  to  you,  on  account  of  those  who  se- 
duce you.  (27)  And  ye  also,  if  the  unction  which  27 
ye  have  received  from  him  remaineth  in  you,  need 
not  that  any  one  should  teach  you ;  but  as  that 
unction  is  from  God,  it  teacheth  you  all  things;  and 
it  is  true,  and  no  falsehood  is  in  it  And  as  it  hath 
taught  you,  remain  ye  in  him.? 

And  now,  my  children,  remain  ye  in  him ;  that  28 
so,  when  he  shall  be  manifested,  we  may  not  be 
ashamed  before  him,  but  may  have  an  open  coun- 
tenance^  at  his  coming.    (29)  If  ye  know  that  he  29 
is  righteous,  ye  also  know,  that  whoever  doeth 
righteousness,  is  from  him.     (III.)  And  ye  see,IIL 
how  great  is  the  love  of  the  Father  towards  us,  who 
hath  called  us  sons,  and  made  us  [such].     There- 
fore the  world  knoweth  us  not,  because  it  likewise 
knoweth  him  not.     (2)  My  beloved,  now  are  we     2 
the  sons  of  God ;  and  hitherto,  it  hath  not  appeared 
what  we  are  to  be :  but  we  know  that,  when  he 
shall  appear,  we  shall  be  in  his  likeness,  and  we 
shall  see  him  as  he  is. — (3)  And  every  one  that    8 
hath  this  hope  from  him,»  purifieth  himself,  as  he 
is  pure.     (4)  And  every  one  that  practiseth  sin,     4 
perpetrateth    iniquity;    for   all   sin  is    iniquity.^ 
(5)  And  ye  know,  that  he  was  manifested  to  take    5 
away  our  sins ;  and  in  him  was  no  sin.    (6)  And    6 
every  one  that  abideth  in  him,  sinneth  not :  and 
every  one  that  sinneth,  hath  not  seen  him,  nor 
hath  known  him.     (7)   My  children,  let  no  one     7 
deceive  you :  he  that  doeth  righteousness,  is  righ- 
teous, as  the  Messiah  also  is  righteous.     (8)  And 
he  that  committeth  sin,  is  of  Satan ;«  because  Satan 
was  a  sinner  from  the  beginning:   and  for  this 
cause,  the  Son  of  God  appeared,  that  he  might  de- 
stroy the  works  of  Satan.     (9)  Every  one  that  is 
bom  of  God,  doth  not  practise  sin ;    because  his 
seed  is  in  him,  and  he  cannot  sin,  because  he  is 
born^  of  God.     (10)  By  this  are  the  children  of 
God  discriminated  from  the  children  of  Satan. 

Every  one  that  practiseth  not  righteousness,  and 
that  loveth  not  his  brother,  is  not  of  God :  (11)  be- 
cause this  is  the  commandment,  which  ye  heard 
from  the  beginning,  that  ye  should  love  one 
another.  (12)  Not  like  Cain,  who  was  of  the  evil  12 
one,  and  slew  his  brother.     And  why  did  he  slay 


8 


9 


10 


11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1   JOHN,   IV. 


436 


him,  but  because  his  own  works  were  evil,  and  those 
IS  of  his  brother  righteous?    (13)  And  wonder  not, 

14  my  brethren,  if  the  world  hate  you.  (14)  We 
know  that  we  have  turned  from  death  unto  life,  by 
this,  that  we  love  the  brethren.     He  that  loveth 

15  not  his  brother,  remaineth  in  death.  (15)  For  every 
one  that  hateth  his  brother,  is  a  man-slayer ;  and 
ye  know,  that  no  man-slayer  can  have  eternal  life 

16  abiding  in  him. — (16)  By  this  we  know  his  love 
towar(£  us,  because  he  gave  up  his  life®  for  us: 
and  we  also  ought  to  give  up  our  lives^  for  our 

17  brethren.  (17)  But  whoever  nath  worldly  posses- 
sions, and  seeth  his  brother  in  want,  and  shutteth 
up  his  bowels  from  him,  how  is  the  love  of  God  in 

18  him  ?  (18)  My  children,  let  us  not  love  one  another 
in  words  and  in  tongue,  but  in  acts  and  in  truth. 

19  (19)  And  by  this,  we  recognize  that  we  are  of  the 
truth;  and,  before  he  shall  come,  we  make  our 

20  hearts  confident.  (20)  But  if  our  heart  condemneth 
us,  how  much  greater  is  God  than  our  heart,  and 

21  knowing  all  things  ?  (21)  My  beloved,  if  our  heart 
condemneth  us  not,  we  have  open  countenances?  be- 

22  fore  God.  (22)  And  whatever  we  £^k,  we  receive 
from  him ;  because  we  keep  his  commandments,  and 

23  do  acceptable  things'^  before  him.  (23)  And  this  is 
his  commandment,  that  we  believe  on  the  name  of 
his  Son  Jesus  the  Messiah,  and  that  we  love  one 

24  another  as  he  hath  commanded  us.  (24)  And  he 
that  keepeth  his  commandments,  is  kept  by  him, 
and  he  dwelleth  in  him :  and  by  this  we  under- 
stand that  he  abideth  in  us,  from  his  Spirit  which 
he  hath  given  to  us. 

IV.  My  beloved,  believe  not  all  spirits;  but  discrimi- 
nate among  spirits,  whether  they  are  of  God :  for 
many  false  prophets  have  gone  out  into  the  world, 

2  (2)  6y  this  the  Spirit  of  God  is  known,  every  spirit 
that  confesseth  that  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  come  in 

8  the  flesh,  is  of  God.  (3)  And  every  spirit  which 
confesseth  not  that  Jesus  the  Messiah  hath  come  in 
the  flesh,  is  not  of  God ;  but  he  is  of  the  false 
Messiah,  of  whom  ye  have  heard  that  he  cometh, 

4  and  now  is  he  already  in  the  world.     (4)  But  ye, 
children,  are  of  God ;  and  ye  have  overcome  them 
because  greater  is  he  who  is  in  you,  than  he  who  is 

5  in  the  world     (5)  And  they  are  of  the  world 


or,  hinueff. 
'  or,  ounelveA 


f  or,  cof^tdence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


436 


1  JOHN,   V. 


'/• 


■:-^'.- 


ic^A 


•Sy. 

^  La.  be  Moved. 


dSy.loQlO 


«  Sy.  Io0|^ 


<or,  00f{/Ed(nice. 


'Sy-r*^ 


8 


10 


therefore  they  speak  from  the  world,  and  the 
world  heareth  them.  (6)  But  we  are  of  Gk)d;  and 
he  that  knoweth  Qod,  heareth  us ;  and  he  that  is 
not  of  God,  heareth  us  not  By  this,  we  know  the 
spirit  of  truth,  and  the  spirit  of  error. — (7)  My  be- 
hoved, let  us  love  one  another:  because  love  is 
from  God ;  and  whoever  loveth,  is  bom  of  God, 
and  knoweth  God.  (8)  Because  God  is  love ;  and 
whoever  loveth  not,  doth  not  know  God.  (9)  By 
this  was  the  love  of  God  towards  us  made  known, 
because  God  sent  his  only-begotten*  Son  into  the 
world,  that  we  by  him  might  live.^  (10)  In  this  is 
love ;  it  was  not  that  we  loved  God,  out  that  Gk)d 
loved  us,  and  sent  his  Son  a  propitiation^  for  our 
sins.  (11)  My  beloved,  if  God  hath  so  loved  us,  11 
we  also  ought  to  love  one  another.  (12)  No  one  12 
hath  ever  seen  God ;  but  if  we  love  one  another, 
God  abideth^  in  us,  and  his  love  is  perfected  in  us. 
(13)  And  by  this  we  know,  that  we  abide  in  him, 
and  that  he  abideth  in  us,  because  he  hath  given  of 
his  Spirit  to  us. — (14)  And  we  have  seen,  and  do 
testify,  that  the  Father  hath  sent  his  Son,  a  Re- 
deemer® for  the  world.  (15)  Whoever  confesseth 
Jesus  to  be  the  Son  of  God,  God  abideth  in  him, 
and  he  abideth  in  God.  (16)  And  we  have  believed 
and  known  the  love,  which  God  hath  towards  us : 
for  God  is  love,  and  whoever  abideth  in  love,  abi- 
deth in  God.  (17)  And  hereby  is  his  love  perfected  17 
with  us ;  that  we  may  have  open  countenances^  in 
the  day  of  judgment ;  because  as  he  was,  so  also 
are  we  in  this  world.  (18)  In  love  there  is  no  fear; 
but  perfect  love  casteth  out  fear;  because  fear 
existeth  in  peril,  and  he  that  feareth  is  not  perfected 
in  love.  (19)  Let  us,  therefore,  love  God ;  because  19 
he  hath  first  loved  us.  (20)  And  if  any  one  shall  20 
say,  I  love  God,  and  yet  hateth  his  brother,  he  is 
a  liar:  for  he  that  loveth  not  his  brother  who  is 
visible,  how  can  he  love  God  who  is  invisible?  (21)  21 
And  this  command  we  have  received  from  him, 
that  whoever  loveth  God,  inust  love  also  his  brother. 
— (V.)  Whoever  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Messiah,  V. 
is  borna  of  God.  And  whoever  loveth  the  beget- 
ter, loveth  him  also  that  is  begotten  of  him.  (2)  2 
And  by  this  we  know,  that  we  love  the  children 
of  God,  when  we  love  God,  and  follow  his  com- 
mandments.    (8)  For  this  is  the  love  of  God,  that    S 


18 
14 


15 


16 


18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1  JOHN,    V. 


437 


we  keep  bis  commandments:  and  his  command- 

4  ments  are  not  burdensome.  (4)  Because,  wboever 
is  bom  of  God,  overcometh  the  world:  and  this  is 
the  victory  that  overcometh  the  world, — our  faith. 

5  (6)  For  wno  is  he  that  overcometh  the  world,  but 
he  that  believeth  that  Jesus  is  the  Son  of  God  ? 

6  This  is  he  who  came  by  the  water  and  the  blood. 
— Jesus  the  Messiah ;  not  by  the  water  only,  but 
by  the  water  and  the  blood.     And  the  Spirit  testi- 

7  fieth ;  because  the  Spirit  is  truth.  [(7*)  For  there 
are  three  that  testify  in  heaven,  the  Father,  the 
"Word,  and  the  Holy  Spirit:  and  these  three  are 

8  one.]  (8)  And  there  are  three  witnesses,  the 
Spirit,  and  the  water,  and  the  blood :  and  these 

9  three  are  in  union.  (9)  If  we  receive  the  testimony 
of  men,  how  much  greater  is  the  testimony  of  God? 
And  this  is  the  testimony  of  God,  which  he  hath 

10  testified  concerning  his  Son.  (10)  Whoever  be- 
lieveth in  the  Son  of  God,  hath  this  testimony  in 
himself.  And  whoever  believeth  not  God,  hath 
made  him  a  liar,  by  not  believing  the  testimony 

11  which  Gbd  hath  testified  concerning  his  Son.  (11) 
And  this  is  the  testimony,  that  God  hath  given  to 

12  us  life  eternal,  and  this  life  is^  in  his  Son.  (12) 
Every  one  that  taketh  hold®  of  the  Son,  taketh 
hold  of  life;  and  every  one  that  taketh  not  hold  of 
the  Son,  hath  not  life. 

18  These  things  have  I  written  to  you,  that  ye  may 
know  that  ye  have  life  eternal, — ^ye  who  believe  in 

14  the  name  of  the  Son  of  God.  (14)  And  this  is  the 
confidence^  that  we  have  towards  him,  that  what- 
ever we  ask  of  him,  agreeably  to  his  will,  he  hear- 

15  eth  us.  (15)  And  if  we  are  persuaded  that  he 
heareth  us  respecting  what  we  ask  of  him,  we  are 
confident  of  receiving  presently  the  petitions  which 

16  we  asked  of  him.— -{16)  If  any  one  shall  see  his 
brother  sin  a  sin  which  doth  not  deserve  death,  he 
shall  ask,  and  life  will  be  given  him, — ^to  them  p 
sajr]  who  sin  not  as  unto  death.  For  there  is  a  sin 
oi  death;  and  I  do  not  say  of  this,  that  a  man 

17  should  pray  for  it.     (17)  For  all  iniquity  is  sin; 

18  and  there  is  a  sin  which  is  not  of  death.  (18)  And 
we  know,  that  every  one  who  is  born  of  God,  sin- 
neth  not:  for  he  that  is  bom  of  God  keepeth  him- 

*  This  verse  is  wanting  in  most  MSS.,  and  b  omitted  in  the  edit  London,  1826 


•»  Sy.  exists, 
Sy.  ^A^]^ 


\sSDC\Sif 

Gr.  ita^'pr^tfia 


Digitized  by 


Google 


488 


'By. 


9  JOHN. 

sel^  and  the  evil  one  toucheth  him  not    (19)  We  19 
know,  that  we  are  of  God ;  and  all  the  world  is 
reposing  on  the  evil  one.    (20)   And  we  know,  20 
that  the  Son  of  God  hath  come,  and  hath  given  us 
knowledge^  that  we  might  know  the  True  One  ;^ 
and  that  we  might  be  in  the  True  One, — ^in  his  Son 
Jesus  the  Messiah.     He  is  the  true  God,ff  and  the 
life  eternal.    (21)  My  children,  keep  yourselveB  21 
from  idolatry. 

Endcf  ihtjbr$t  EjntOe  of  John  Urn  Idgats. 


The  Seeond  Epistle  of  John. 


Gr.  Kvpfa. 
IStng.Lady, 


^  or^  him. 
dSy. 


^-^43' 


The  Elder,*  to  Kuria^  the  elect,  and  to  her  chil- 
dren :  whom  I  love  in  the  truth,  and  not  I  only,  but 
all  they  who  know  the  truth ;  (2)  for  the  sake  of  the 
truth,  which  abideth  in  us  and  is  with  us  for  ever. 
(8)  May  grace  be  with  you,  and  mercy,  and  peace, 
fix>m  God  the  Father,  and  from  our  ijord  Jesus  the 
Messiah,  the  Son  of  the  Father,  in  truth  and  love. 

I  have  rejoiced  greatly,  that  I  found  [some]  of 
thy  children,  who  walked  in  the  truth,  as  we  have 
received  commandment  from  the  Father.  (5)  And 
now,  I  beseech  thee,  Kuria, — (I  write  no  new  com- 
mandment to  thee,  but  that  which  was  with  us  from 
the  beginning,) — that  we  should  love  one  another. 
(6)  And  this  is  love,  that  we  walk  according  to  the 
commandment.  This  is  the  commandment,  as  ye 
have  heard  from  the  beginning,  that  we  should 
walk  in  it.^  (7)  Because  many  seducers  have  gone 
forth  into  the  world,  who  confess  not  that  Jesus  the 
Messiah  hath  come  in  the  flesh.  This  is  a  seducer 
and  Antichrist.^  (8)  Take  heed  to  yourselves,  that 
il  ye  lose  not  what  ye  have  wrought ;  but  that  ye 
may  be  recompensed  with  a  full  reward.  (9)  Every 
one  who  transgresseth,  and  abideth  not  in  the  doc- 
trine of  the  Messiah,  God  is  not  in  him.  And  he 
who  abideth  in  his  doctrine,  he  hath  the  Father  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3  JOHN. 

10  the  Son.  (lOJ  If  any  one  cometh  to  yoii|  and 
brii^eth  not  this  doctrine,  entertain  him  not  in  your 

11  house,  nor  say  to  him,  Joy*  to  thee :  (11)  for  he 
that  saith  to  him^  Joy  to  thee,  is  a  participator  in 
his  evil  deeds. 

12  Haying  many  things  I  could  write  to  you,  I  would 
not  with  paperf  and  ink ;  but  I  hope  to  come  to 
you,  and  to  converse  mouth  to  mouth,  that  our  joy 

18  Bttay  be  complete. — (18)  The  children  of  thy  elect 
sister  salute  thee.    Grace  be  with  you.    Amen. 

End  of  the  second  Epistle  of  John  the  Legate. 


439 


Sy. 


Lat  Charta. 


The  Third  Epistle  of  John. 


The  Elder,*  to  my  beloved  Gains,  whom  I  love 
2  in  the  truth. — (2)  Our  beloved ;  in  all  things, 

pray  for  thee  that  thou  mayest  prosper  and  be  in 
8  nealth,  as  thy  soul  doth  prosper.    (8)  For  I  re- 
joiced grpatly,  when  the  brethren  came  and  testified 
concerning  thy  integrity,  even  as  thou  walkest  in 
4  the  truth.    (4)  And  I  have  no  greater  joy,  than  to 
6  hear  that  my  children  walk  in  the  truth.    (5)  Our 
beloved,  thou  doest  in  faith,  what  thou  penormest 
towards  the  brethren ;  and  especially  towards  stran- 

6  gers,  (6)  who  have  borne  testimony  to  thy  charity 
before  the  whole  church,  to  whom  thou  doest  good, 

7  as  is  pleasing  to  God.    (7)  For  they  went  forth  in 
behalf  of  his  name,  taking  nothing  of  the  Gentiles. 

8  (8)  We  therefore  ought  to  receive  such  persons, 
that  we  may  be  aiders  of  the  truth. 

9  I  was  desirous  of  writing  to  the  church ;  but  he 
who  loveth  to  be  foremost  among  them,  Diotrephes, 

10  receiveth  us  not.  (10)  Therefore,  if  he  come,  re- 
member those  his  doings,  that  he  treated  us  with 
malignant  words;  and  this  not  suffiping  him,  he  re- 
ceived not  the  brethren;  and  those  who  would 
receive  [them],  he  prohibited,  and  even  ejected 

11  them  from  the  church.    (11)  Our  beloved,  be  not 


Sy, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


440 


JUDE. 


^  or*  imUator, 


Sy.  reed. 


a  follower^  of  what  is  evil,  but  of  what  is  good. 
He  that  doeth  good,  is  of  God ;  but  he  that  doeth 
evil,  hath  not  seen  God. — (12)  Of  Demetrius,  there  12 
is  good  testimony  from  every  one,  and  from  the 
church,  and  from  the  truth  itself:  and  we  also  bear 
[him]  testimony,  and  ye  know  that  our  testimony 
IS  true. 

I  had  many  things  to  write  to  thee;  but  I  will  13 
not  write    fthem]    to  thee  with  ink  and  pen.<^ 
(14)  But  I  nope  soon  to  see  thee,  and  to  converse  14 
mouth  to  mouth.    (Iff)  Peace  be  with  thee. — ^The  15 
friends  salute  thee.    Salute  the  friends,  severally, 
by  name. 

End  cfihe  third  EpttOecfJohn  the  Legate. 


The  Epistle  of  Jnde,  the  Brother  of  James. 


*  Gr.  salvation. 


or,  priority. 


JUDB,  a  servant  of  Jesus  the  Messiah|  and  the 
brother  of  James, — ^to  the  called  people,  the  beloved 
of  God  the  Father,  the  preserved  by  Jesus  the  Mes- 
siah : — (2)  Mercy  and  peace  in  love,  be  multiplied 
to  vou. 

My  beloved,  while  I  take  all  pains  to  write  to 
you  of  our  conmion  life,*  it  is  needftd  for  me  to 
write  to  you,  exhorting  you  to  maintain  a  conflict 
for  the  faith  which  was  once  delivered  to  the  saints. 

(4)  For  some  have  obtained  entrance,  who  from  the 
beginning  were  registered  beforehand  under  this 
condemnation :  wicked  men,  who  pervert  the  grace 
of  God  to  impurity,  and  deny  him  who  is  the  only 
Lord  God  and  our  Lord,  Jesus  the  Messiah. — 

(5)  And  I  wish  to  remind  you, — ^though  ye  all 
know  it, — ^that  God,  after  once  rescuing  the  people 
from  Egypt,  again  destroyed  them  who  believed 
not.  (6^  And  the  angels  that  kept  not  their  pri- 
macy, *>  out  left  their  station,  he  hath  reserved  in 
chains  unknown,  under  darkness,  unto  the  judgment 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JUDE. 

7  of  the  great  day.  (7)  As  Sodom  and  Gomorrah, 
and  the  surrounding  cities,  which  in  like  manner 
followed  whoredom  and  went  after  strange  flesh, 
are  placed  beneath .  everlasting  fire,  being  doomed 

8  to  judgment. — (8)  In  the  same  manner,  too,  these 
sensu^  dreamers*'  defile  the  fle^h.  and  despise  au- 

9  thority,  and  revile  excellency.  (9)  But  Michael 
the  archangel,  who,  in  debate  with  the  Accuser,  con- 
tended about  the  body  of  Moses,  did  not  venture  to 
bring  against  him  a  reviling  declaration ;  but  said, 

10  The  Lord  will  rebuke  thee.  (10)  But  these  [men] 
revile  things  which  they  do  not  understand ;  and 
in  the  things  of  which  they  have  a  natural  persua- 
sion as  animal  beings,  in  these  they  corrupt  them- 

11  selves.  (11)  Woe  to  them ;  for  they  have  gone  in 
the  way  of  Cain ;  and,  after  the  error  of  Balaam, 
they  have  lusted  for  gain ;  and,  in  the  rebellion 

12  of  Kor^h,  they  have  perished.^ — (12)  These  are 
they  who,  in  their  feastings,  riot  while  polluting 
themselves,  feeding  themselves  without  fear ;  clouds 
without  rain,  moved  about  by  the  winds;  trees 
whose  fruit  hath  failed,  and  they  are  without  fruit, 

18  twice  dead,  and  uplifted  from  their  root ;  (18)  ra- 
ging waves  of  the  sea,  which,  by  their  foam,  manl- 
iest their  confusion ;  shooting-stars,®  for  which  is 
reserved  the  blackness  of  darkness  for  ever. — 

14  (14)  And  of  them  also  prophesied  Enoch,  who  was 
the  seventh  from  Adam,  when  he  said:  Behold, 
the  Lord  cometh,    with   myriads  of  his  saints; 

15  (16)  to  execute  judgment  upon  all ;  and  to  convict 
all  the  wicked,  because  of  all  the  deeds  they  have 
wickedly  committed ;  and  because  of  all  the  hard 
speeches,  which  they,  ungodly  sinners,  have  ut- 

16  tered.  (16)  These  are  they  who  murmur  and  com- 
plain of  every  thing,  while  they  walk  according  to 
their  lusts;  and  their  mouth  speaketh  shocking 
things;  and  they  flatter  people,  for  the  sake  of 

17  gain.— (17)  But  do  ye,  my  beloved,  remember  the 
words  which  were  blefore  spoken  by  the  legates  of 

18  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah ;  (18)  because  they  told 
you,  that  in  the  end  of  the  times  there  would  be 
scoffers,  going  after  wickedness,  according  to  their 
lusts. 

19  These  are  they  that  separate  [themselves],  sen- 

20  sual  persons,^  not  having  the  Spint.  (20)  But,  my 
beloved,  be  ye  built  up  anew,  in  your  holy  faith. 


441 


•  or,  debauched 
in  dreams. 


<*  L  e.  toiUperith 


•  or,  metmn. 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


442 


APOCALYPSE,   L 


throug|h  the  Holjr  Spirit,  while  ye  pray. 

'       '     '     "       of  God,  wHile  we 


21 


22 


^      (21)  And 

let  us  Keep  ourselves  in  the  love  of  God,  whi 
wait  for  the  mercy  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah, 
unto  our  eternal  life.     (22)  And  some  of  them, 
snatch  ye  from  the  fire.  (23)  And  when  thej  repent,  28 
have  compassion  on  them,  with  fear,  hating  even 
the  tunic  that  is  defiled  by  the  flesh. 

And  to  him  who  is  able  to  preserve  you  faultless,  24 
and  spotless,  and  to  establish  vou  without  a  blemish, 
(25)  oefore  his  majesty,  witn  joy, — [namely,]  the  26 
only  God,  our  Deliverer,  by  means  of  Jesus  the 
Messiah  our  Lord, — ^be  praise,  and  dominion,  and 
honor,  and  majesty,  both  now  and  in  all  ages. 

End  of  the  Epi$Ue  cf  Jude  the  Legate^  the  brother  (f  James 
andJoses, 


The  Revelation,  which  was  made  by  God  to  John  the  fivangelist, 
in  the  Island  of  Patmos, 

To  which  he  was  banished  by  Nero  the  Emperor 


Thb  Bevelation  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  which  GKxl 
gave  to  him,  to  show  to  his  servants  the  things  that 
must  shortlv  occur :  and  he  signified  [it]  by  send- 
ing, through  his  angel,  to  his  servant  John;  (2) 
who  bore  witness  to  the  word  of  God,  and  to  the 
testimonv  of  Jesus  the  Messiah,  as  to  all  that  he 
saw.  (8)  Blessed  is  he  that  readeth,  and  they  who 
hear  the  words  of  this  prophecy,  and  keep  the 
things  that  are  written  in  it;  for  the  time  is  near. 

John  to  the  seven  churches  which  are  in  Asia: 
Grace  to  you  and  quietude,  from  him  who  is,  and 
who  was,  and  who  is  to  come;  fi'om  the  seven 
Spirits  which  are  before  his  throne ;  (5)  and  fix)m 
Jesus  the  Messiah,  the  Witness  the  Faithful,  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,   L 


443 


First-born  of  the  dead,  and  the  Prince  of  the  kings 
of  the  eartl.;  who  hath  loved  us,  and  released  us 

6  from  our  sins  by  his  blood ;  (6)  and  hath  made  us 
a  kingdom  sacerdotal*  to  God  and  lus  Father:  to 
whom  be  glory  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever. 

7  Amen. — (7)  Behold,  he  cometh  with  clouds;  and 
all  eyes  shall  see  him,  and  also  they  who  speared 
him ;  and  all  the  tribes  of  the  earth  shall  mourn  on 

8  account  of  him.  Yes:  Amen.  (8)  I  am  Alpha, 
also  Omega,**  saith  the  Lord  God ;  who  is,  and  was, 

9  and  is  to  come,  the  omnipotent.^— (9)  I  John,  your 
brother,  and  partaker  with  you  in  the  affliction  and 
suffering  that  are  in  Jesus  the  Messiah,  was  in  the 
island  caUed  Patmos,^  because  of  the  word  of  God, 
and  because  of  the  testimony  of  Jesus  the  Messiah. 

10  (10)  I  was  in  the  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day ;  and  I 
neara  behind  me  a  great  voice,  as  of  a  trumpet, 

11  which  said:  (11)  That  which  thou  seest,  write  m  a 
book,  and  send  to  the  seven  churches,  to  Ephesus, 
and  to  Smyrna,  and  to  Pergamos,  and  to  Thyatira, 
and  to  Sardis,  and  to  Philadelphia,  and  to  Laodicea. 

12  — (12)  And  I  turned  myself  to  look  at  the  voice 
that  talked  with  me ;  and  when  I  had  turned,  I  saw 

18  seven  candlesticks  of  gold;  (18)  and,  in  the  midst 
of  the  candlesticks,  one  like  the  Son  of  man,  clothed 
to  the  feet,«  and  girded  about  his  paps  with  a  girdle 

14  of  gold.  (14^  And  his  head  and  his  hair  were 
white,  like  wnite  wool,  like  snow ;  and  his  eyes, 

15  like  a  flame  of  fire:  (15)  and  his  feet  were  like  fine^ 
brass,  flaming  in  a  furnace :  and  his  voice,  like  the 

16  sound  of  many  waters.  (16)  And  he  had  in  his 
right  hand  seven  stars ;  and  from  his  mouth  issued 
a  sharp  two-edged  sword ;  and  his  visage  was  like 

17.  the  sun  shining  in  its  strength.  (17)  And  when  I 
saw  him,  I  fell  at  his  feet  like  one  dead.  And  he 
laid  his  right  hand  upon  me,  and  said.  Fear  not : 

18  I  am  the  First  and  the  Last ;  (18)  and  who  liveth 
and  was  dead ;  and  behold,  I  am  alive  for  ever  and 
ever.    Amen.     And  I  have  the  keys  of  death  and 

19  of  the  unseen  world.g  (19)  Therefcre,  write  what 
thou  hast  seen,  and  the  things  that  are;  and  the 

20  things  that  are  to  be  hereafter :  (20)  the  mystery  of 
these  seven  stars  which  thou  sawest  in  my  right 
hand,  and  the  seven  candlesticks  of  gold.  Those 
seven  stars  are  the  angels**  of  the  seven  churches ; 
and  the  seven  candlesticks  are  the  seven  churches. 


Sy. 


»» Sy.  Olaph, 
and  also  Ttsu 
=  AifZ. 

Sy.  Who 
holdethaUin 
his  power. 

Sy.^)4a. 


•  Sy/)5>a0= 

Gr.  qtoSiiffi, 

'Sy. 
Ill  in\ 


Sy.^i 


n  Sy.  ]BPlO 


Digitized  by 


Google 


444 


APOCALYPSE,   IL 


S7.)a)]!i) 


c  or.  gcvrden. 


8y  \lmjI 


To  the  angel*  of  the  church  which  is  at  Ephesua,  IL 
write :  These  things  saith  he  who  holdeth  all  things, 
and  the  seven  stars,  in  his  right  hand ;  he  that  walk* 
eth  in  the  midst  of  the  seven  candlesticks  of  gold; 
(2)  I  know  thy  works,  and  thy  toil,  and  thy  patience ;    2 
and  [that]  thou  canst  not  endure  the  wicked  ;  and 
thou  nast  tried  them  who  say  they  are  legates,  and 
are  not ;  and  thou  hast  found  them  liars.    (3)  And    8 
thou  hast  had  patience,  and  hast  borne  the  burden,  on 
account  of  my  name,  and  hast  not  fainted.  (4)  Yet    4 
I  have  [a  charge]  against  thee,  on  account  of  thy 
former  love,  which  thou  hast  left    (5)  Therefore,    6 
remember  whence  thou  hast  fallen;  and  repent, 
and  do  the  former  works :  or  if  not,  I  will  come  to 
thee  (juickly,  and  I  will  remove  thy  candlestick 
from  Its  place,  except  thou  repent.     (6)  But  this    6 
thou  hast,  that  thou  natest  the  deeds  of  the  Nico- 
laitans,*>  which  I  also  [hate]. — (7)  He  that  hath    7 
ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches.     To  him  who  is  victorious,  will  I  give  to 
eat  of  the  tree  of  life  which  is  in  the  paradise^  of 
my  Q-od. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at    8 
Smyrna,  write:  These  things  saith  the  First  and 
the  Last,  he  who  was  dead,  and  liveth,    (9)  I  know    9 
thy  works,  and  the  affliction,  and  the  poverty-, — 
(yet  thou  art  rich ;) — ^and  the  railing  which  is  from 
them  who  say  they  are  Jews,  and  they  are  not, 
but  are  of  the  congregation  of  Satan.     (10)  Be  not  10 
terrified  at  any  of  the  things  thou  art  to  suffer. 
For  lo,  the  Accuser  will  throw  some  of  you  into 
custody,  that  ye  may  be  tried ;  and  there  will  be 
trouble  to  you  ten  days.    Be  faithful  unto  death, 
and  I  will  give  thee  the  crown  of  life. — (11)  He  11 
that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to 
the  churches.     He  that  is  victorious,  shall  not  be 
harmed  by  the  second**  death. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  at  Pergamos,  12 
write :  Thus  saith  he  who  hath  the  sharp  two-edged 
sword ;  (18)  I  know  thy  works,  and  where  thou  18 
dwellest,  [even]  where  the  throne  of  Satan  is :  and 
thou  boldest  fast  ny  name,  and  hast  not  denied 
the  faith  of  me,  in  those  days  when  my  faithful 
witness,  who  was  slain  among  you,  was  made  a 
spectacle  where  Satan  dwellett    (14)  Yet  I  have  a  14 
small  [charge]  against  thee.     Thou  hast  there  them 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,   IL 


445 


18 


19 


who  hold  the  doctrine  of  Balaam,  who  taught 
Balak  to  throw  a  stumbling-block  before  the  chil- 
dren of  Israel,  that  they  might  eat  the  sacrifices  of 

15  idols,®  and  might  commit  whoredom.  (15)  So  also 
thou  hast  them  who  hold  the  doctrine  of  the  Nico- 

16  laitans.^  In  like  manner,  repent  thou.  (16)  Or  if 
not,  I  will  come  to  thee  quickly,  and  I  will  war  upon 

17  them  with  the  sword  of  my  mouth.— (17)  He  that 
hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the 
churches.  To  him  that  is  victorious,  will  I  give 
to  eat  of  the  hidden  manna ;  and  I  will  give  him  a 
white  counter,  fir  and  upon  the  counter  a  new  name 
written,  which  no  one  knoweth  but  he  that  receiv- 
eth  it. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  at  Thyatira, 
write :  These  things  saith  the  Son  of  God,  who  hath 
his  eyes  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  his  feet  like  fine 
brass :  (19)  I  know  thv  works,  and  love,  and  faith, 
and  service,  and  also  thy  patience ;  and  that  these 

20  thy  latter  works  are  more  than  the  former.  (20) 
But  I  have  [a  charge]  against  thee,  because  thou 
sufferest  thy  woman^  Jezabel,  who  saith  she  is  a 
prophetess,  and  teacheth,  and  seduceth  my  servants 
to  whoredom,  and  to  eating  of  the  sacrifices  of  idols. 

21  (21)  And  I  gave  her  a  season  for  repentance,  and 

22  she  is  not  msposed  to  repent  of  her  whoredom. 
(22)  Behold,  I  will  cast  her  upon  a  bed,  and  them 
who  commit  adultery  with  her  into  great  afSiciion, 

28  unless  they  repent  of  their  deeds.  (23)  And  her 
children  will  I  slay  with  death :  and  all  the  churches 
shall  know,  that  1  am  he  who  searcheth  reins  and 
hearts;  and  I  will  render  to  each  of  you  according 
to  your  works.  (24)  And  I  say  to  you, — to  the 
rest  that  are  in  Thyatira,  to  all  them  who  have  not 
received  this  doctrine,  the  men  who  have  not  known 
the  profound  things  of  Satan,  as  they  say ; — I  lay 
no  other  burden  upon  you:    (25)  but,  what  ^( 

26  have,  hold  fast  until  I  come.--(26)  And  to  him 
that  is  victorious,  and  to  him  that  observeth  my 
works  unto  the  end,  to  him  will  I  give  authority* 

27  over  the  nations ;  ^7)  and  he  shall  rule  them  with 
a  rod  of  iron ;  ana  uke  vessels  of  pottery,  shall 
they  be  broken :  as  I  also  have  received  of  my 

28  Father.    (28)  And  I  will  give  him  the  morning 

29  star. — (29)  He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what 
the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 


•  Some  MSa, 
what  idoiaten 
do. 


24 


25 


*  or,  w^e. 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


446 


APOCALYPSE,   IIL 


•  i.  e.  tvill  cause 


And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at  Sar-m 
dii^  write:  These  things  saith  he  who  hath  the 
seven  Spirits  of  God,  and  the  seven  stars:  I  know 
thy  worKs,  that  thou  hast  a  name  that  thou  livest, 
and  thou  art  dead.    (2)  Awake,  and  preserve  the    2 
things  that  remain,  which  are  ready  to  die ;  for  I 
have  not  found  thy  works  complete  before  my  God, 
(8)  Remember  therefore  how  thou  hast  received    3 
and  heard ;  and  observe  [those  precepts],  and  re- 
pent   If  then  thou  wilt  not  wake  up,  I  will  come 
upon  thee  as  a  thief;  and  thou  shalt  not  know  at 
whsA  hour  I  will  come  upon  thee.    (4)  Yet  thou     4 
hast  a  few  names  in  Sardis,  who  have  not  defiled 
their  garments;  and  they  shall  walk  with  me  in 
white,  for  they  are  worthj. — (5)  He  that  is  victo-    5 
rious,  shall  be  so  clothed  in  white  robes ;  and  I  will 
not  blot  out  their  name  from  the  book  of  life;  and 
I  will  confess  their  name  before  my  Father,  and  be- 
fore his  angels.    (6)  He  that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear    6 
what  the  Spirit  saith  to  the  churches. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at    7 
Philadelphia,  write:  These  things  saith  he  that  is 
holy,  he  that  is  true,  he  that  hath  the  key  of  David, 
who  openeth  and  no  man  shutteth,  and  shutteth  and 
no  man  openeth ;  (8)  I  know  thy  works.     And  lo, 
I  have  set  before  thee  an  open  door,  which  no  man 
can  shut :  because  thou  hast  a  little  strength ;  and 
thou  hast  kept  my  word,  and  hast  not  denied  my 
name.     (9)  Joehold,  I  will  give*  them  of  the  con- 
gregation of  Satan,  who  say  they  are  Jews,  and  are 
not,  but  lie, — ^behold  I  will  make  them  to  come  and 
do  obeisance  before  thy  feet ;  and  to  know  that  I 
have  loved  thee.    (10)  Because  thou  hast  kept  the  10 
word  of  my  patience,  I  also  will  keep  thee  firom 
the  hour  of  temptation,  that  is  to  come  on  all  the 
inhabited  world,  to  tiy  them  who  dwell  on  the 
earth.     (11)  I  come  quickly:  hold  fast  what  thou  11 
hast,  so  that  no  one  take  thy  crown. — (12)  Him  12 
that  is  victorious,  will  I  make  a  pillar  in  the  temple 
of  my  God ;  and  he  shall  not  again  go  out :  and  I 
will  write  upon  him  the  name  of  my  God,  and  of 
the  new  Jerusalem  which  descendeth  from  heaven 
from  my  GiDd,  and  my  own  new  name.    (13)  He  18 
that  hath  ears,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit  saith  to 
the  churches. 

And  to  the  angel  of  the  church  which  is  at  Lao*  14 


8 


9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  IV. 


447 


dicea,  write:  These  things  saith  the  Amen,  the 
"Witness,  the  faithful,  the  true,  the  Chief  *>  of  the 

15  creation  of  God :  (15)  I  know  thy  works,  that  thou 
art  neither  hot,  nor  cold ;  I  would  that  thou  wert 

16  cold  or  hot.  (16)  So,  because  thou  art  lukewarm,* 
neither  hot  nor  cold,  I  am  about  to  vomit  thee 

17  from  my  mouth.  (17)  Because  thou  sayest,  I  am 
rich  and  affluent,  and  nave  no  want  of  any  thing; 
and  thou  knowest  not,  that  thou  art  impotent,  and 

18  miserable,  and  needy,  and  blind,  and  naked;  (18) 
I  counsel  thee  to  buy  of  me  gold  tried  in  the  fire, 
that  thou  may  est  become  rich ;  and  white  raiment, 
to  be  clothed,  and  that  the  shame  of  thy  naked- 
ness may  not  be  seen ;  and  put  eye-salve  on  thine 

19  eyes,  that  thou  mayest  see.  (19)  As  many  as  I 
love,  I  rebuke  and  chasten.     Be  emulous  there- 

20  fore,  and  repent.  (20)  Behold,  I  have  been  stand- 
ing at  the  door,  and  I  will  knock :  if  any  man  hear 
my  voice,  and  open  the  door,  I  will  come  in  to  him, 

21  and  will  sup  with  him,  and  he  with  me. — (21)  And 
to  him  that  is  victorious,  to  him  will  I  give  to  sit 
with  me  on  my  throne,  even  as  I  was  victorious,  and 

22  sat  down  with  my  Father  on  his  throne.  (22J  He 
that  hath  ears  to  hear,  let  him  hear  what  the  Spirit 
saith  to  the  churches. 

IV.  After  these  things,  I  looked  and  lo,  a  door  [was] 
open  in  heaven.  And  the  first  voice  which  I  heard, 
was  as  of  a  trumpet  talking  with  me.  It  said, 
Come  up  hither ;  and  I  will  show  thee  the  things 

2  that  must  occur  hereafter.  (2)  Instantly,  I  was  m 
the  Spirit :  and  lo,  a  throne  was  placed  in  heaven ; 

8  and  there  was  [one]  seated  on  the  throne.  (8^  And 
he  who  sat,  was  like  the  appearance  of  a  jasper- 
stone,  and  of  a  sardine,  and  of  a  rainbow  of  the 
clouds,  round  about  the  throne,  in  form  as  the  ap 

4  pearance  of  emeralds.  (4)  Around  the  throne  were 
twenty  and  four  seats;  and  upon  those  seats  sat 
twenty  and  four  Elders, »  who  were  clothed  in  white 
robes,  and  on  whose  heads  were  coronets  of  gold. 

6  (5)  And  from  the  throne  proceeded  lightnings,  and 
the  sound  of  thunders ;  and  seven  lamps  of  fire 
were  burning  before   his  throne,  which  are  the 

6  seven  Spirits  of  God.  (6)  And  before  the  throne, 
as  it  were  a  sea  of  glass  like  crystal ;  and  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne,  and  around  it,  and  before  tte 


"  Sy.  "U-i 
Sy.  )}Q.A^ 


Sy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


448 


APOCALYPSE.   V. 


^St.IZqIki 


Sy.lo*, 

etpudf  or  wor- 
thy. 


»>Sy.]^l 


throne,  were  four  Animak,'*  ftill  of  eyes  in  their 
front  and  in  their  rear,    (7)  *And  the  first  Animal     7 
resembled  a  lion;  and  the  second  Animal  resembled 
a  oalf ;  and  the  third  Animal  had  a  face  like  a  man; 
and  the  fourth  Animal  resembled  an  eagle  when 
flying.    (8)  And  these  four  Animals  had,  each  of    8 
them,  six  wings  around  it :  and  within  they  were 
fhll  of  eyes:  and  they  have  no  cessation,  day  or 
night,  from  saying:  Holy,  Holy,  Holy,  the  Lord 
Qtxl,  the  Omnipotent,  who  was,  and  is,  and  is  to 
ooma    (9)   And  when  these  Animals  give  glory    9 
and  honor  and  praise  to  him  that  sitteth  on  the 
throne,  to  him  who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever,  (10)  10 
the  twenty  and  four  Elders  £ill  down  before  him 
who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  they  worship  him 
who  liveth  for  ever  and  ever;  and  they  cast  their 
coronets  before  the  throne,  saying,  (11)  Worthy  art  11 
thou,  O  Lord  our  God,  the  Holy,  to  receive  glorv 
and  honor  and  power;  for  thou  hast  created  all 
things,  and  by  thee  they  exist;  and  because  of  thy 
pleasure  they  had  being  and  were  created. 

And  I  saw,  at  the  right  hand  of  him  who  sat  on  V. 
the  throne,  a  book,  which  was  written  within  and 
on  the  bade  side,  and  which  was  sealed  with  seven 
seals.     (2)  And  I  saw  a  strong  angel,  who  pro-    2 
claimed  with  a  loud  voice.  Who  is  competent*  to 
open  the  book,  and  to  loose  the  seals  thereof?  (8)    8 
And  no  one  either  in  heaven  above,  or  on  the  earth, 
or  beneath  the  earth,  was  able  to  open  the  book,  or 
to  look  thereon.    (4)  And  I  wept  much,  because  no    4 
one  was  found,  who  was  competent  to  open  the 
book,  or  to  look  on  it.     (5)  And  one  of  the  Elders    5 
said  to  me.  Weep  not ;  behold,  the  Lion  of  the  tribe 
of  Judah,  the  Bioot  of  David,  hath  been  victorious: 
He  will  open  the  book,  and  its  seven  seals. — (6^    6 
And  I  looked,  and  in  the  midst  of  the  Elders  stood 
a  lamb,^  as  if  slain;  and  it  had  seven  horns,  and 
seven  eyes,  which  are  the  seven  Spirits  of  God  that 
are  sent  into  all  the  earth.    (7)  And  he  came,  and     7 
took  the  book  from  the  right  hand  of  him  who  sat 
on  the  throne.    (8)  And  when  he  took  the  book,     8 
the  four  Animals  and  the  twenty  and  four  Elders 
fell  down  before  the  Lamb,  each  of  them  having  a 
harp,  and  cups  of  gold  full  of  odors,  which  are 
the  supplications  of  the  saints.    (9)  And  they  ^ong    9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  VI. 


449 


a  new  anthem,  saying :  Competent  art  thou,  to  take 
the  book,  and  to  open  the  seals  thereof;  because 
thou  wast  slain,  and  hast  redeemed  us  to  God  by 
thy  blood,  out  of  every  tribe,  and  tongue,  and  peo- 

10  pie,  and  nation;  (10)  and  thou  hast  made  them 
kings  and  priests  to  our  God ;  and  they  reign  on 

11  the  earth.  ^  (11)  And  I  looked,  and  I  hearc^  as  it 
were  the  voice  of  many  angels,  around  the  throne, 
and  the  Animals  and  tne  Elders;  and  the  number 
of  them  was  a  myriad  of  mjrriads,  and  thousand  of 

12  thousands,  (12)  who  said,  with  a  loud  voice ;  Com- 
petent is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain,  to  receive  power, 
and  riches,  and  wisdom,  and  strength,  and  nonor, 

18  and  glory,  and  blessing;  (13)  and  [to be  over]  every 
created  thing,  that  is  in  heaven,  or  on  earth,  or 
under  the  earth,  or  in  the  sea;  and  all  that  are  in 
them.«  And  I  heard  him  who  sat  on  the  throne  say : 
Unto  the  Lamb  be  given,  blessing,  and  honor,  and 

14  glory,  and  power,  for  ever  and  ever.  (14)  And 
the  four  Animals  said:  Amen.  And  the  Elders 
fell  down,  and  adored. 

VL  And,  when  the  Lamb  had  opened  one  of  the 
seven  seals,  I  looked,  and  I  heard  one  of  the  four 
Animals  say,  as  with  a  voice  of  thunder,  Come,  and 

2  see.    (2)  And  I  looked,  and  there  was  a  white 
.  horse :  and  he  who  sat  on  it,  had  a  bow ;  and  a 

coronet  was  given  to  him,  and  he  went  forth  con- 

3  quering,  that  he  might  conquer. — (3)  And  when  he 
had  opened  the  second  seal,  I  heard  the  second 

4  Animal  say,  Come.  (4)  And  there  went  forth 
another,  a  red  horse ;  and  to  him  who  sat  thereon, 
it  was  given,  to  take  tranquillity  from  the  earth; 
and  that  they  should  kill  one  another ;  and  there* 

5  was  given  to  him  a  great  sword. — (5)  And  when 
he  had  opened  the  third  seal,  I  heard  the  third 
Animal  say,  Come,  and  see.  And  I  looked,  and  lo, 
a  black  horse ;  and  he  that  sat  thereon,  had  a  bal- 

6  ance  in  his  hand.  (6)  And  I  heard  a  voice  in  the 
midst  of  the  four  Ajiimals,  saying :  A  choenix  of 
wheat  for  a  denarius, »  and  three  choenices  of  barley 
for  a  denarius ;  and  hurt  not  the  oil  and  the  wine. 

7  — (7)  And  when  be  had  opened  the  fourth  seal,  I 

8  heard  the  fourth  Animal  say,  Coijie,  and  see.  (8) 
And  I  looked,  and  lo,  a  pale  horse ;  and  the  name 
of  him  who  sat  thereon  was  Death  ;*>  and  Hades^ 


The  Syriac 
here  diffen 
much  from 
the  Greek. 


*  i.  e.  about  a 
quart  for  15 

'  cerUs, 

^  Sy.  IZoiD 

•  Sy.  ^< 


Digitized  by 


Google 


460 


APOCALYPSE,   VIL 


*  Sy.  beoMt  of 


•  or,  movements 


followed  after  him.    And  there  was  given  him 
authority  over  the  fourth  part  of  the  earth,  to  alay 
with  the  sword,  and  by  famine,  and  by  death,  and 
by  the  ravenous  beast^  of  the  earth. — (9)  And  when    9 
he  had  opened  the  fifth  seal,  I  saw  under  the  altar, 
the  souls  of  them  who  were  slain  on  account  of 
the  word  of  Gk)d,  and  on  account  of  the  testimony 
to  the  Lamb  which  was  with  them.    (10)  And  10 
they  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  saying:  How  long,  O 
Lord,  thou  holy  and  true,  dost  thou  not  judge  and 
avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth? 
(11)  And  to  each  one  of  them  was  given  a  white  11 
robe ;  and  it  was  told  them,  that  they  must  be  quiet 
yet  a  little  while,  until  the  consummation  of  their 
fellow-servants  and  brethren,  who  were  to  be  killed 
as  they  had  been.: — (12)  And  I  looked,  when  he  12 
had  opened  the  sixth  seal,  and  there  was  a  great 
earthquake ;«  and  the  sun  became  black,  like  sack- 
cloth of  hair;   and  the  whole  moon  became  like 
blood,    (13)  And  the  stars  of  heaven  fell  on  the  13 
earth,  as  a  ng-tree  casteth  its  unripe  figs,  when  it  is 
shaken  by  a  strong  wind.     (14)  And  the  heavens  14 
separated,  as  a  book  is  rolled  up:  and  all  motm- 
tams  and  islands  were  removed  cut  of  their  places. 
(15)  And  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  the  nobles,  15 
and  the  captains  of  thousands,  and  the  rich  men, 
and  the  men  of  valor,  and  every  servant  and  firee  . 
man,  hid  themselves  in  caves,  and  in  the  clefla  of 
the  mountains;  (16)  and  they  said  to  the  moun-  16 
tains  and  to  the  clefts,  Fall  over  us,  and  hide  us 
firom  the  face  of  him  who  sitteth  on  the  throne, 
and  firom  the  wrath  of  the  Lamb:  (17)  For  the  17 
great  day  of  their  wrath  is  come;  and  who  is  able 
to  stand  r 

And  afi;er  these  things  I  saw  four  angels,  who  ViL 
stood  on  the  four  corners  of  the  earth ;  and  they 
held  the  four  winds  of  the  earth,  so  that  the  wind 
blew  not  on  the  earth,  nor  on  the  sea,  nor  on  the 
trees.— (2)  And  I  saw  another  angel,  and  he  came    2 
up  from  the  rising  of  the  sun ;  and  he  had  the  seal 
01  the  living  God ;  and  he  called  out,  with  a  loud: 
voice,  to  the  four  angels  to  whom  it  was  given  to 
hurt  the  earth  apd  the  sea,  saying:  (3)  Hurt  ye    8 
not  the  earth,  nor  the  sea,  nor  the  trees,  until  we 
shall  have  sealed  the  servants  of  our  God  upon 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,    VIIL 


451 


4  their  foreheads.*  (4)  And  I  heard  the  number  of 
them  that  were  sealed,  a  hundred  and  forty  and  four 

6  thousand,  sealed  from  every  tribe  of  Israelites.  (6) 
of  the  tribe  of  Judah,  twelve  thousand  were  sealed: 
of  the  tribe  of  Eeuben,  twelve  thousand :  of  the 

6  tribe  of  Gad,  twelve  thousand :  (6)  of  the  tribe  of 
Ashur,  twelve  thousand :  of  the  tribe  of  Naphtali, 
twelve  thousand :  of  the  tribe  of  Manasseh,  twelve 

7  thousand:  (7)  of  the  tribe  of  Simeon,  twelve  thou- 
sand: of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  twelve  thousand :  of  the 

8  tribe  of  Ijsachar,  twelve  thousand:  (8)  of  the  tribe 
of  Zebulon,  twelve  thousand :  of  the  tribe  of  Jo- 
seph,  twelve  thousand:    of  the  tribe  of  Benja- 

9  mm,  twelve  thousand. — (9)  And  after  these  things, 
I  looked,  and  lo,  a  great  multitude,  which  no  one 
could  number,  from  all  kindreds,  and  nations,  and 
tribes,  and  tongues;  who  stood  before  the  throne, 
and  before  the  Lamb,  clothed  in  white  robes,  ana 

10  palms  in  their  hands ;  (10)  and  they  cried,  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying :  Salvation**  to  our  God,  to  him 

11  who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  and  to  the  Lamb.  (11) 
And  all  the  angels  stood  around  the  throne  and  the 
Elders  and  the  four  Animals;  and  they  fell  upon 
their  faces  before  his  throne,  and  worshipped  Grod- 

12  (12)  saying:  Amen.  Blessing,  and  glory,  and 
wisdom,  and  thanksgiving,  and  honor,  and  power, 
and  might,  [be]  to  our  God,  for  ever  and  ever: 

18  Amen.  (13)  And  one  of  the  Elders  turned,^  and 
said  to  me :  These  who  are  clothed  in  white  robes, 

14  who  are  they,  and  whence  came  they?  (14)  And  I 
said  to  him :  My  lord,  thou  knowest.  Ana  he  said 
to  me :  These  are  they  who  came  from  great  afSic- 
tion ;  and  they  have  washed  their  robes,  and  made 

15  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  (15)  There- 
fore are  they  before  the  throne  of  God ;  and  they 
serve  him  day  and  night,  in  hia  temple;  and  he 

16  who  sitteth  on  the  throne,  wilt  protect  them :  (16) 
they  will  not  hunger,  nor  thirst  any  more;  nor 
will  the  sun  fall  on  them,  nor  any  heat    (17)  Be- 

17  cause  the  Lamb,  which  is  in  the  midst  of  the  thione, 
will  feed  them ;  and  will  lead  them  to  fountains  of 
living  water;  and  God  will  wipe  every  tear  from 
their  eyes. 

YllL  And  when  he  had  opened  the  seventh  seal,  there 
was  silence  in  heaven,  for  about  half  an  how 


Sy. 
iheireifeB. 


Sy.  IjLOJCLfi 


•   or,  answered 


Digitized  by 


Google 


452 


APOCALYPSE,   VIIL 


2^7.  give. 


*>  or  monffmaOM. 


«8y. 
Gr.  •A4'ivSof. 


^  or,  too*  oft. 


^)  And  I  saw  the  seven  angels,  who  stood  before    2 
God;   and  to  them  were  given,  seven  trumpeta 
(8)  And  another  ancel  came  and  stood  by  the  al-    3 
tar;  and  he  held  a  golden  censer:  and  much  incense 
was  given  him,  so  that  he  might  oflFer,*  with  the 

i)rajers  of  all  the  saints,  upon  the  golden  altar  be* 
ore  the  throne.     (4)  And  the  smoke  of  the  incense    4 
of  the  prayers  of  the  saints  went  up  before  God, 
from  the  hand  of  the  angel.    (5)  And  the  angel    5 
took  the  censer,  and  fiU^  it  with  fire  from  tne 
altar,  and  cast  it  upon  the  earth :  and  there  were 
thunders,  and  lightnings,  and  voices,  and  an  earth- 
quake.**   (6)  And  the  seven  angels,  who  had  the    6 
seven  trumpets,  prepared  themselves  to  sound. — 
(7)  And  the  first  sounded ;  and  there  was  hail,  and    7 
fire,  which  were  mingled  with  water:  and  these 
wei'e  thrown  upon  the  earth ;  and  a  third  part  of 
the  earth  was  burned  up,  and  a  third  part  of  the 
trees  were  burned,  and  all  green  grass  was  burned. 
— (8)  And  the  second  angel  sounded,  and,  as  it    8 
were  a  great  mountain  burning  with  fire,  was  cast 
into  the  sea ;  and  also  a  third  part  of  the  sea  be- 
came blood.     (9)  And  a  third  part  of  all  the  crea-    9 
tures  in  the  sea,  that  had  life,  died ;  and  a  third 
part  of  the  ships  were  destroyed. — (10)  And  the  10 
third  angel  sounded,  and  there  fell  from  heaven  a 
star,  burning  like  a  lamp ;  and  it  fell  upon  a  third 
part  of  the  rivers,  and  upon  the  fountains  of  water. 
(11)  And  the  name  of  the  star  was  called  Worm-  11 
wood;c   and  a  third  part  of  the  waters  became 
wormwood ;    and  many  persons  died    from  the 
waters,  because  they  were  bitter. — (12)  And  the  12 
fourth  angel  sounded,  and  a  third  part  of  the  sun 
was  smitten,**  and  the  third  part  of  the  moon,  and 
the  third  part  of  the  stars ;  so  that  the  third  part 
of  them  were  dark,  and  they  became  dark ;  and 
the  day  did  not  give  light  for  the  third  part  of  it, 
and  the  night  in  like  manner.    (13)  And  I  saw  and  13 
heard  an  eagle,  which  flew  in  the  midst,  and  it  had 
a  tail  of  blood,*  while  it  said,  with  a  loud  voice : 
Woe,  woe,  to  them  who  dwell  on  the  earth,  because 


*  The  Greek  word  is,  fUd'oupav^jxari,  in  mid  heaven ;  compounded  of  fibltfs^, 
middle  and  oupavo;,  heaven.  But  the  Syriac  translator  supposed  it  to  be  a  com- 
pound of  uitf'o^  middle^  oJpcl  tail^  and  aHybo,  blood;  and  he  rendered  it  accordingly. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  IX. 


453 


of  the  remaining  sounds  of  the  trumpets  of  the  three 
IX.  angels,  who  are  to  sound. — (IX.)  And  the  fifth  an- 
gel sounded;  and  I  saw  a  star,  which  fell  from 
heaven  upon  the  earth.     And  there  was  given  to 

2  him  the  key  of  the  pit  of  the  abyss.*  (2)  And  he 
opened  the  pit  of  the  abyss ;  and  smoke  issued  from 
the  pit,  like  the  smoke  of  a  furnace  that  is  in  blast ; 
and  the  sun  and  the  air  were  darkened  by  the 

8  smoke  of  the  pit.  (3)  And  out  of  the  smoke,  came 
locusts  upon  the  earth :  and  power  was  given  them, 

4  like  that  which  scorpions  have  on  the  earth.  (4) 
And  it  was  commanded  them,  that  they  should  not 
hurt  the  grass  of  the  earth,  nor  anv  herb,  nor  any 
tree;  but  [only]  the  persons,  who  had  not  the  seal 

5  of  God  upon  their  foreheads.  (5)  And  it  was  given 
them,  that  they  should  not  kill  them,  but  should 
torment  them  nve  months :  and  their  torment  was 
like  the  torment  of  a  scorpion,  when  it  striketh  a 

6  person.  (6)  And  in  those  days,  men  will  desire 
death,  and  will  not  find  it ;  and  they  will  long  to 

7  die,  and  death  will  fly  from  them.  (7)  And  the 
appearance  of  the  locusts  [was  this] ;  they  were  like 
tne  appearance  of  horses  prepared  for  battle ;  and 
on  their  heads,  was,  as  it  were  a  coronet,  resembling 
gold ;  and  their  faces  were  like  the  faces  of  men. 

8  (8)  And  they  had  hair,  like  the  hair  of  women : 

9  and  their  teeth  were  like  those  of  lions.  (9)  And 
thev  had  breastplates,  like  breastplates  of  iron: 
ana  the  sound  of  their  wings,  was  like  the  sound 
of  the  chariots  of  many  horses  rushing  into  battle. 

10  (10)  And  they  had  tails  like  those  of  scorpions,  and 
stings ;    and  with  their  tails  they  had  the  power 

11  of  hurting  men  five  months.  (11)  And  they  had 
a  king  over  them,  the  angel  of  the  abyss ;  and  his 
name,  in  Hebrew,  is  Abaddon  ;*>  and  in  Greek,  his 

12  name  is  ApoUyon.®    (12)  One  woe  is  past;   lo, 

13  there  come  yet  two  woes  after  them. — (13)  And 
the  sixth  angel  sounded ;  and  I  heard  a  voice  from 
the  horns  of  the  golden  altar  which  was  before  God, 

14  (14)  that  said  to  the  sixth  angel  having  a  trumpet : 
Loose  the  four  angels  that  are  bound  at  the  great 

16  river  Euphrates.  (15)  And  the  four  angels  were 
loosed;  who  are  prepared,  for  an  hour,  and  a  day, 
and  a  month,  ana  a  year,  to  slay  the  third  part  of 

16  men.  (16)  And  the  number  of  the  warrior  horse- 
men was  two  myriads  of  myriads :    and  I  heard 


•Sx.)2iOOOlZ 


**  Sy.  rx^^K. 

«  Sy.  ^(Aoe) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


454 


APOCALYPSB,   X. 


'  or,  is  dbaut  to. 


their  number.    (17)  And  while  I  looked  on  the  17 
horses  in  the  vision,  and  on  them  who  sat  on  them, 
p  saw]  that  the  breastplates  were  of  fire,  and  of 

{acinthi  and  of  salphur.      And  the  heads  of  the 
lorses  were  like  the  heads  of  lions ;  and  from  their 
mouths  issued  fire,  and  smoke,  and  sulphur.    (18)  18 
And  by  these  three  plagues,  a  third  part  of  the 
men  were  slain ;  [namely,]  by  the  fire,  and  by  the 
smoke,  and  by  the  sulphur,  wnich  issued  from  their 
mouths,    f  19)  For  the  power  of  the  horses  was  in  19 
their  mouth,  and  in  their  tails ;  for  their  tails  were 
like  serpents,  having  heads  to  strike  wittu    (20)  20 
And  the  residue  of  men  who  were  not  slain  by 
these  plagues,  repented  not  of  the  works  of  their 
hands,  so  as  not  to  worship  demons,  and  idols  of 
gold,  and  of  silver,  and  brass,  and  stone,  and  wood, 
which  cannot  see,  nor  hear.    (21)  And  they  re-  21 
pented  not  of  their  murders,  nor  of  their  sorceries, 
nor  of  their  whoredom,  nor  of  their  thefts. 

And  I  saw  another  mighty  angel,  that  descended  X. 
from  heaven,  clothed  with  a  cloud ;  and  a  cloud- 
bow  was  over  his  head,  and  his  face  was  like  the 
Sim,  and  his  feet  like  pillars  of  fire.     (2)  And  he    2 
had  in  his  hand  an  open  little  book :  and  he  placed 
his  right  foot  upon  the  sea,  and  his  left  upon  the 
land :  (3)  and  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice,  as  a  lion    8 
roareth :  and  when  he  had  cried,  the  seven  thun- 
ders uttered  their  voices.    (4)  And  when  the  seven    4 
thunders  had  spoken,  I  was  about  to  write.    And     " 
I  heard  a  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Seal  up  the 
things  which  the  seven  thunders  have  uttered,  and 
write  them  not    (5)  And  the  angel  whom  I  saw    5 
standing  upon  the  sea  and  the  land,  raised  his 
right  hand  to  heaven,  (6)  and  swore,  by  him  who     6 
Uveth  for  ever  and  ever,  who  created  heaven  and 
the  things  in  it,  and  the  earth  and  the  things  in  it, 
and  the  sea  and  the  things  in  it, — that  toe  time 
should  be  no  longer ;  (7)  but,  in  the  days  of  the     7 
voice  of  the  seventh  angel,  when  he  shalia  sound, 
and  the  mystery  of  God  shall  be  consummated;  as 
he  announced  to    his    servants   the  prophets. — 
(8)  And  the  voice  which  I  heard  from   heaven,     8 
spioke  to  me  again,  and  said:  G-o,  take  the  little 
open  book  in  the  hand  of  the  angel  that  standeth 
on  the  sea  and  on  the  land.    (9)  And  I  went  to    9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  XL 


455 


the  angel,  telling  him  to  give  me  the  little  book. 
And  he  said  to  me.  Take,  and  eat  it:  and  it  will 
make  thy  bowels  bitter,  but  in  thy  mouth  it  will 

10  be  sweet  as  honey.  (10)  And  I  took  the  little 
book  from  the  haj;Ld  of  the  angel,  and  ate  it:  aud  it 
was  in  my  mouth 'sweet  like  honey:  and  when  I 

11  had  eaten  it,  my  bowels  were  bitter.  (11)  And 
he  said  to  me,  Thou  must  a^n  prophesy  upon^ 
many  nations,  and  peoples,  and  princes,  and  km^. 

XI. — (Al.)  And  a  reed  was  given  to  me,  like  a  rc3; 
ana  the  angel  stood,  saying.  Arise,  and  measure  the 
temple  of  God,  and  the  altar,  «^  and  them  that  wor- 

2  ship  therein.  (2)  But  the  court  which  is  without 
the  temple,  leave  out,  and  measure  it  not ;  because 
it  is  given  to  the  Gentiles ;  and  they  will  tread  down 

8  the  holy  city  forty  and  two  months.  (8)  And  I 
will  give  my  two  witnesses ;  and  they  will  proph- 
esy a  thousand  and  two  hundred  and  sixty  days, 

4  clothed  in  sackcloth.  (4)  These  are  the  two  olive- 
trees,  and  the  two  candlesticks  which  stand  before 

6  the  Lord  of  the  earth.  (5)  And  if  any  person  will 
harm  them,  fire  cometh  out  of  their  mouth,  and 
consumeth  their  adversary ;    and  if  any  one  will 

6  harm  them,  thus  must  he  De  slain.  (6)  They  have 
power  to  shut  up  heaven,  so  that  the  rain  shall 
not  fall  in  those  days :  and  they  have  power  over 
the  waters,  to  turn  them  into  blood ;  and  to  smite 
the  earth  with  all  plagues,  as  often  as  they  please. 

7  (7)  And  when  they  shall  have  completed  their  tes- 
timony, the  beast  of  prey  that  came  up  from  the 
abyss,  will  make  war  upon  them,  and  will  over- 

8  come  them.  (8)  And  their  dead  bodies  [will  be] 
in  the  open  street  of  that  ^eat  city,  which  is  spirit- 
ually called  Sodom  and  Egypt,  where  also  their 

9  Lord  was  crucified.  (9)  And  [they]  *>  of  the  nations 
and  tribes  and  peoples  and  tongues,  will  look  upon 
their  dead  bodies,  three  days  and  a  half;  and  will 
not  suffer  their  dead  bodies  to  be  laid  in  the  grave. 

10  (10)  And  they  who  dwell  on  the  earth  will  rejoice 
over  them,  and  will  be  merry,  and  will  send  pres- 
ents to  one  another;  because  those  two  prophets 

11  tormented  them  who  dwell  on  the  earth.  (11)  And 
after  these  three  days  and  a  half,  the  spirit  of  life 
from  God  entered  into  them,  and  they  stood  upon 
their  feet:  and  great  fear  fell  on  those  who  saw 

12  theuL    (12)  And  they®  heard  a  great  voice  from 


Sy.^ 


L  e.tkeimiei 
court. 


^  or ^  tome 


Some  copies: 
/  heard. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


456 


APOCALYPSE,    Xll. 


d  or,  movement. 


'  oTfimntmenL 


By.-^ 


heaven,  which  said  to  them:  Come  up  hither. 
And  they  ascended  to  heaven  in  a  cloud;  and  their 
enemies  saw  them.  (13)  And  in  the  same  hour  13 
there  was  a  great  earthquake, <*  and  the  tenth  part 
of  the  city  fell:  and  the  persons  killed  in  the  earth- 
quake, were  seven  thousand  names:  and  they  who 
remained  were  afraid,  and  gave  glory  to  God. — 
(14)  The  second  woe  is  passed :  behold,  the  third  14 
woe  Cometh  quickly. 

And  the  seventh  angel  sounded;  and  there  were  15 
voices  and  thunders,  which  said :  The  kingdom  of 
the  world  hath  become  fthe  kingdom]  of  our  Lord 
and  of  his  Messiah  ;  and  he  will  reign  for  ever  and 
ever.    (16)  And  the  twenty  and  four  Elders,  who  16 
are  before  the  throne  of  God,  [and]  who  sit  upon 
their  seats,  fell  upon  their  faces,  and  worshipped 
Qt)d,  (17)  saying:  We  praise  thee,  0  Lord  God,  17 
Omnipotent,  who  art,  and  wast ;  because  thou  hast 
assumed  thy  great  power,  and  hast  reigned.     (18)  18 
And  the  nations  were  angry;  and  thy  anger  is 
come,  and  the  time  of  the  dead,  that  they  should  be 
judged :  and  that  thou  shouldst  give  a  reward  to 
thy  servants,  the  prophets,  and  the  saints,  and  to 
them  that  fear  thy  name,  the  small  and  the  great ; 
and  that  thou  shouldst  destroy  them  who  destroyed 
the  earth. 

And  the  temple  of  God  in  heaven  was  opened ;  19 
and  the  ark  of  his  covenant  was  seen  in  his  temple: 
and  there  were  lightnings,  and  thunders,  and  voices, 
and  an  earthquake,®  and  great  hail. — (XII.)  And  XTT. 
a  great  wonder  was  seen  in    heaven;   a  woman 
clothed  with  the  sun,  and  the  moon  under  her  feet, 
and  on  her  head  a  coronet  of  twelve  stars.   (2)  And,     2 
being  with  child,  she  cried,  and  travailed,  and  had 
the  pangs  of  bringing  forth.     (8)  And  there  ap-    8 
peared  another  wonder  in  heaven;  and  lo,  a  great 
nery  dragon,  which  had  seven  heads  and  ten  horns, 
ana  upon  his  head  seven  diadems.*     (4)  And  his    4 
tail  drew  along  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven, 
and  cast  them  on  the  earth.     And  the  dragon  was 
standing  before  the  woman,  who  was  about  to  bring 
forth,  so  that,  when    she  should    bring  forth,  he 
might  devour  her  child.     (5)    And  she  brought    6 
forth  a  male  child,  who  was  to  rule  all  nations  with 
a  rod  of  iron.    And  her  child  was  caught  up  to  God 
and  to  his  throne.     (6)  And  the  woman  fled  into     6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,    XIIL 


467 


the  wilderness,  where  she  had  a  place  which  was 
prepared  for  her  by  God  ;  so  that  they  might 
nourish  her  there  a  thousand  and  two  hundred  and 

7  sixty  days. — (7)  And  there  was  war  in  heaven: 
Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  dragon ; 

8  and  the  dragon  and  his  angels  fought,  (8)  and 
prevailed  not;  nor  was  their  place  found  any  more 

9  in  heaven.  (9)  And  the  great  dragon  was  cast 
out,  the  old  serpent,  who  is  called  the  Deceiver,  and 
Satan,  who  seauceth  all  the  inhabited  world :  he 
was  cast  upon  the  earth,  and  his  angels  were  cast 

10  out  with  him.  (10)  And  I  heard  a  great  voice  in 
heaven,  which  said :  Now  is  there  deliverance,  and 
the  power  and  the  kingdom  of  our  God,  and  the 
dominion  of  his  Messiah :  because  the  Accuser  of 
our  brethren  is  cast  out,  who  accused  them  day  and 

11  night  before  our  God.  (11)  And  they  overcame 
him,  because*>  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  and  be- 
cause of  the  word  of  their  testimony :   and  they 

12  loved  not  their  life,  even  to  death.  (12)  Therefore, 
be  joyful,  O  heaven,  and  ye  that  dwell  there.  Woe 
to  the  earth,  and  to  the  sea ;  for  the  Deceiver  hath 
come  down  to  you,  being  in  great  wrath  since  he 

13  knoweth  that  his  time  is  short. — (13)  And  when 
the  dragon  saw  that  he  was  cast  out  upon  the  earth, 
he  persecuted  the  woman  who  brought  forth  the 

14  male  child.  (14)  And  to  the  woman  were  given 
the  two  wings  of  the  great  eagle,  that  she  might  flj 
into  the  wilderness,  to  her  place;  where  she  is 
nourished  a  time«  and  times  and  half  a  time,  from 

16  the  face  of  the  serpent.  (15)  And  the  serpent 
ejected  from  his  mouth  waters  like  a  river,  after  the 
woman,  that  he  might  cause  her  to  be  carried  away 

16  by  the  flood.  (16)  And  the  earth  helped  the 
woman :  and  the  earth  opened  its  mouth,  and  drank 
up  the  flood  which  the  serpent  ejected  from  bis 

17  mouth.  (17)  And  the  dragon  was  enraged  against 
the  woman ;  and  he  went  to  make  war  upon  the 
residue  of  her  seed,  who  keep  the  commandments 

18  of  God,  and  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.  (18)  And 
he  stood  on  the  sand  of  the  sea. 

Xni.  And  I  saw  a  beast  of  prey*  come  up  from  the  sea, 

having  ten  horns,  and  seven  heads ;  and  upon  his 

horns  ten  diadems,  and  upon  his  heads  names  of 

2  blasphemy.     (2)    And  the  beast  of  prey  which  I 


Sy  ^*\^^ 


Sy.lj^ 


Sy.  of  tooth. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


458 


APOCALYPSE,   XIIL 


Sy.  loj 


BjM^L] 


*Sy.VM05, 

a  spirit. 


"^  Sy.  ]kli»o3 


saw,  was  like  a  leopard ;  and  his  feet  like  [those] 
of  a  wolf,*»  and  his  mouth  like  the  mouth  of  lions : 
and  the  dragon  gave  to  him  his  own  power  and  his 
throne,  and  great  authority.    (3)  And  one  of  his    8 
heads  was  wounded  as  it  were  to  death ;  and  his 
deadly   wound  was  healed.      And  all  the  earth 
wondered  after  the  beast  of  prey.     (4)  And  they     4 
worshipped  the  dragon,  because  he  had  given  au- 
thority to  this  beast  of  prey ;  and  [they  said],  who 
can  make  war  upon  him  ?  (5)  And  there  was  given    6 
to  him  a  mouth  sj)eaking  great  things,  and  blasphe- 
mies :  and  authority  was  given  him  to  operate  forty 
and  two  months.     (6)  And  he  opened  his  mouth     6 
in  blasphemy  towards  God,  to  blaspheme  his  name, 
and  his  tabernacle,  and  them  who  dwell  in  heaven. 
(7)  And  authority  was  given  him  over  every  tribe    7 
and  people  and  tongue  and  nation:  and  it  was 
given  him  to  wage  war  with  the  saints,  and  to 
overcome  them.    (8)  And  all  that  dwell  on  the    8 
earth,  whose  names  are  not  written  in  the  book  of 
life  of  the  Lamb  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
world,  will  worship  him.     (9)  If  any  one  hath  ears,     9 
let  him  hear.    (10)  If  [any  one]  carrieth  into  cap-  10 
tivity,  he  shall  himself  go  into  captivity ;  and  if 
any  one  slayeth  with  the  sword,  he  must  be  slain 
with  the  sword :  here  is  the  patience  and  the  faith 
of  the  saints. — (11)  And  I  saw  another  beast  of  11 
prey,  which  came  out  of  the  earth ;  and  he  had 
two  horns  like  those  of  a  lamb,  and  he  spoke  like 
the  dragon.    (12)  And  before  him  he  exercised  all  12 
the  authority   oi   the  first  beast  of  prey,  whose 
deadly  wound  was  healed.    (13)  And  he  wrought  13 
great  signs,  ^  even  so  as  to  maJie  fire  come  down 
from  heaven  upon  the  earth,  before  men.    (14)  14 
And  he  seduced  them  that  dwell  on  flie  eartt^  to 
erect  an  image  to  the  beast  of  prey  who  had  the 
wound  from  a  sword  and  recovered    (15)  And  it  16 
was  given  him  to  put  life^  into  the  image  of  the 
beast  of  prey ;    and  to  cause  that  all  they  who 
would  not  worship  the  image  of  the  beast  of  prey, 
should  be  slain :  (16)  and  to  cause  that  all,  great  16 
and  small,  rich  and  poor,  bond  and  free,  should  re- 
ceive a  mark®  on  their  right  hands,  or  upon  their 
foreheads;  (17)  so  that  no  one  miffht  be  able  to  17 
buy  or  to  sell,  except  those  who  had  the  mark  of 
the  name  of  the  beast  of  prey,  or  the  number  of  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  XIV. 


459 


18  name.    (18)  Here  is  wisdom:  let  him  that  hath  in- 
telligence/ compute  the  number  of  the  beast  of 


prey 


for  it  is  the  number  of  a  man :  and  its  num- 


Sy.  ]jocn 


ber  is  six  hundred  and  sixty  and  six. 

XrV.  And  I  looked,  and  behold,  a  Lamb  stood  on 
mount  Zion ;  and  with  him  the  number  of  a  hun- 
dred and  forty  and  four  thousand,  having  his  name 
and  the  name  of  his  Father  written  upon  their 

2  foreheads.  (2)  And  I  heard  a  sound  from  heaven, 
as  the  sound  of  many  waters,  and  as  the  sound  of 
great  thunder;  and  the  sound  which  I  heard,  was 

8  like  that  of  harpers  striking  on  their  harps.  (8) 
And  they  sang  a  new  song  before  the  throne,  and 
before  the  four  Animals  and  the  Elders:  and 
no  one  was  able  to  learn  that  song,  except  the 
hundred  and  forty  and  four  thousand  who  were 

4  redeemed  from  the  earth.  (4)  These  are  they  who 
have  not  defiled  themselves  with  women,  for  they 
are  virgins.  These  are  they  who  followed  the 
Lamb,  whithersoever  he  went.  These  have  been 
redeemed  by  Jesus  from  among  men,  the  first  fruits 

6  to  God  and  the  Lamb.  (5)  And  in  their  mouth 
was  found,  no  falsehood ;  for  they  are  without  faults, 

6  — (6)  And  I  saw  another  angel  flying  in  heaven : 
ana  with  blood,  he  had  the  everlasting  gospel,  to 
proclaim  to  dwellers  on  the  earth,  and  to  every 

7  nation  and  tribe  and  tongue  and  people ;  (7)  saying 
with  a  loud  voice.  Worship  God,  and  give  glory 
to  him ;  because  the  hour  of  his  judgment  is  come ; 
and  adore  ye  Him,  who  made  heaven  and  earth, 

8  and  the  sea,  and  the  fountains  of  water.  (8)  And 
another,  a  second  angel  followed  him,  sayinj_ 
Fallen,  fallen  is  Babylon^  the  great,  which  made 
all  nations  drink  of  the  wine  of  the  rage  of  her 

9  whoredom.  (9)  And  another,  a  third  angel  follow- 
ed them,  saying  with  a  loud  voice:  If  any  man 
shall  worship  the  beast  of  prey  and  its  image,  and 
shall  receive  its  mark  upon  his  forehead  or  on  his 

10  hand,  (10)  he  also  shall  drink  of  the  wine  of  the 
wrath  of  {jod,  which  is  poured  undiluted^  into  the 
cup  of  his  indignation,  and  shall  be  tormented  with 
fire  and  sulphur,  before  the  holy  angels,  and  be- 
fore the  throne.     (11)  And  the  smoke  of  their  tor- 

11  ment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever ;  and  there  is 
no  rest,  by  day  or  by  night,  to  those  that  worship 


Sy.  ^\^io 


^8^1  = 
Gr.  axpar«». 


Digitized  by 


Google 


460 


APOCALYPSE,   XV. 


(XtVuUage- 


Sy.Ul 


worldSf  or 
ages 


'  I  e.  the  holy 
of  holies. 


12 


13 


14 


15 

16 
17 

18 


19 


the  beast  of  prejr  aad  its  image.  (12)  Here  is  the 
patience  of  the  saints,  who  keep  the  commandments 
of  God,  and  the  faith  of  Jesus.  (18)  And  I  heard 
a  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Wnte,  Blessed  are 
the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord,  henceforth :  yes,  saith 
the  Spirit,  that  they  may  rest  from  their  toils;  for 
their  deeds  do  accompany  them. — (14)  And  I 
looked,  and  lo,  a  white  cloud;  and  upon  the 
cloud  sat  one  who  was  like  the  Son  of  man ;  and 
on  his  head  was  a  crown  of  gold,  and  in  his  hand  a 
sharp  sickle.  ^15)  And  another  angel  came  out  of 
the  temple,  crying  with  a  loud  voice,  to  him  that 
sat  on  tne  cloud.  (16)  And  he  thrust  his  sickle 
over  the  earth;  and  tne  earth  was  reaped.  (17) 
And  another  angel  came  out  of  the  temple  that  is 
in  heaven,  having  also  a  sharp  sickle.  <*  (18)  And 
another  angel  came  out  from  the  altar,  having  au- 
thority over  fire.  And  he  cried  with  a  loud  voice, 
to  him  who  had  the  sharp  sickle,  saying :  Thrust 
in  thy  sickle  which  is  sharp,  and  gather  the  clusters 
of  the  vineyard  of  the  earth,  because  the  grapes  of 
the  earth  are  ripe.  (19)  And  the  angel  thrust  in 
his  sickle  on  the  earth,  and  gathered  the  vintage  of 
the  earth,  and  cast  fit]  into  the  wine-press  of  the 
wrath  of  the  great  God.  (20)  And  the  wine-press  20 
was  trodden,  up  to  the  horses'  bridles,  for  a  thou- 
sand and  six  hundred  furlongs. 

And  I  saw  another  prodigy*  in  heaven,  great  XV. 
and  wonderful ;  seven  angels,  having  seven  plague^ 
the  last  in  order,  because  with  them  the  wrath  of 
Qtod  is  consummated.  (2)  And  I  saw  as  it  were,  a  2 
sea  of  glass  mixed  with  fire :  and  they,  who  had 
been  victorious  over  the  beast  of  prey,  and  over  its 
image,  and  over  the  number  of  its  name,  were 
standing  on  the  sea  of  glass;  and  they  had  the 
harps  of  God.  (8)  And  they  sing  the  song  of  Moses 
the  servant  of  God,  and  the  song  of  the  Lamb, 
saying:  Great  and  marvellous  are  thy  deeds.  Lord 
God  Almightv;  just  and  true  are  thy  ways,  0 
Kinff  of  worlds.**  (4)  Who  shall  not  fear  thee,  0 
Lord,  and  glorify  thy  name?  Because  thou  only 
art  holy  and  just :  Because  all  nations  shall  come 
and  worship  before  thee,  since  thy  righteousnesses 
have  been  revealed. — (5)  And  after  this  I  beheld, 
and  the  temple*'  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  testimony  in 


8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  XVL 


461 


6  heaven,  was  opened.  (6)  And  the  seven  angels  who 
had  the  seven  plagues,  went  forth  from  the  temple, 
clothed  in  clean  splendid  linen,  and  girded  about 

7  their  breast  with  girdles  of  gold.  (7)  And  one  of 
the  four  Animals  gave  to  those  seven  angels  seven 
cups<*  of  gold,  full  of  the  wrath  of  God  who  liveth 

8  for  ever  and  ever.  (8)  And  the  temple  was  filled 
with  smoke,  from  the  glorj  of  God  and  from  his 
power ;  and  no  one  was  able  to  enter  the  temple, 
until  the  seven  plagues  of  the  seven  angels  were 
accomplished. 

XVI.  And  I  heard  a  voice,  which  said  to  the  seven 
angels :  Go  forth,  and  pour  those  seven  cups  of  the 

2  wrath  of  God  upon  the  earth.— (2)  And  the  first 
went,  and  poured  his  cup  upon  the  earth ;  and  there 
was  a  malignant  and  painful  ulcer  upon  those  men 
who  had  the  mark  oi  the  beast  of  prey,  and  who 

8  worshipped  its  image. — (3)  And  the  second  angel 
poured  his  cup  upon  the  sea ;  and  it  became  blood, 
like  that  of  a  dead  person ;  and  every  living  soul 

4  of  things  in  the  sea,  died.— ^4)  And  the  third  angel 
poured  his  cup  upon  the  rivers  and  the  fountains 

6  of  water ;  and  they  became  blood.  (6)  And  I 
heard  the  angel  of  the  waters  say :  Righteous  art 
thou,  who  art  and  who  wast,  and  art  holy ;  because 

6  thou  hast  done  this  judgment.  (6)  For  they  have 
shed  the  blood  of  saints  and  prophets;  and  thou 
hast  given  them  blood  to  drink,  for  they  deserve  it. 

7  (7)  And  I  heard  [one  from]  the  altar*  say:  Yes, 
Lord  God  Almighty:   true  and  righteous  is  thy 

8  judgment.  (8)  And  the  fourth  poured  his  cup 
upon  the  sun:  and  it  was  permitteahim,*>  to  scorch 

9  men  with  fire.  (9)  And  men  were  scorched  with 
great  heat;  and  men  blasphemed  the  name  of  God, 
who  hath  authority  over  these  plagues ;  and  they 

10  repented  not,  to  give  glory  to  him. — (10)  And  the 
fifth  poured  his  cup  on  the  throne  of  the  beast  of 
prey ;  and  his  kingdom  became  darkness ;  and  they 

11  gnawed  their  tongues,  from  pain;  (11)  and  thej 
blasphemed  the  God  of  heaven,  on  account  of  their 

Sains  and  their  ulcers,  and  did  not  repent  of  their 
eeds. — (12)  And  the  sixth  poured  his  cup  upon 
the  great  river  Euphrates;*'  and  its  waters  dried  up, 
so  that  a  way  might  be  prepared  for  the  kings 
18  from  the  rising  of  the  sun,    (13^  And  I  saw  [issu- 


By.      ^ 
6r.  ^laXac. 


Sy. 
^  or,  it 


Sy.  1^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


462 


APOCALYPSE,   XVII. 


0  817.1^2.1 


Sy. 


*  Sy.  ]rt\r\ 


ing]  from  the  mouth  of  the  dragon,  and  from  the 
mouth  of  the  beast  of  prey,  and  from  the  mouth  of 
the  false  prophet,  three  unclean  spirits  like  frogs: 
(14)  (for  they  are  the  spirits  of  demons,  who  work  14 
prodigies  ;<i^  and  they  go  forth  to  all  the  kings  of 
all  the  habitable  world,  to  gather  them  to  the  battle 
of  the  great  day  of  God  Almighty.    (16)  (And  lo,  15 
I  come  as  a  thief.     Blessed  is  he  that  watcheth, 
and  keepeth  his  garments;  lest  he  walk  naked,  and 
they  see  his  shame.)  (16)  And  they  collected  them  16 
together  in  a  place  called,  in  Hebrew,  Armaged- 
don.«^17)  And  the  seventh  poured  his  cup  on  17 
the  air;  and  there  issued  a  loud  voice  from  the 
temple,  from  the  throne,  which  said:  It  is  done  1 
(18)  And  there  were  lightnings,  and  thunders,  and  18 
voices;  and  there  was  a  great  earthquake,  the  like 
of  which  there  was  never,  since  men  were  on  the 
earth,  such  an  earthquake,  and  so  great.  (19)  And  19 
the  great  city  became  three  parts.    And  the  city 
of  the  nations  fell ;  and  Babylon  the  great  was 
remembered  before  God,  to  give  her  the  cup  of 
the  wine  of  the  heat  of  his  wrath,      (20)   And  20 
every  island  fled  away ;  and  the  mountains  were 
not  found.    (21)  And  a  great  hail,  as  it  were  21 
of  a  talent  weight,  fell  from  heaven  upon  men: 
and  the  men  blasphemed  God,  on  account  of  the 
plague  of  hail ;  for  the  plague  of  it  was  very  great 


Then  came  one  of  the  seven  angels  who  have  XVTL 
the  seven  cups,  and  talked  with  me,  saying :  Come, 
I  will  show  thee  the  judgment  of  the  great  harlot, 
who  sitteth  upon  many  waters ;  (2)  with  whom  the    2 
kings  of  the  earth  have  practised  whoredom,  and 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth  have  been  inebriated 
with  the  wine  of  her  whoredom.     (3)  And  he  led    S 
me  in  spirit  into  the  wilderness :  and  I  saw  a  wom- 
an sitting  on  a  red  beast  of  prey,  which  was  ftdl 
of  names  of  blasphemy,  and  had  seven  heads  and 
ten  horns.      (4)  And  the  woman  was  clothed  in     4 
purple  and  scarlet,  and  gilded  with  gold,  and  pre- 
cious stones,  and  pearls ;  and  she  had  a  cup*  of  gold 
in  her  hand,  which  was  full  of  the  pollutions  and 
impurity  of  her  whoredoms  of  the  earth.     (5)  And     6 
upon  her  forehead  was  the  name  written:   Mys- 
tery:  Babylon  the  great;  the  Mother  of  Harlots, 
and  of  the  contaminations  of  the  Earth     (6)  And    6 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,    XVIIl. 


468 


I  saw  that  the  woman  was  intoxicated  with  the 
blood  of  the  saints,  and  with  the  blood  of  the  wit- 
nesses^  of  Jesus.    And  when  I  saw  her,  I  wondered 

7  with  great  amazement. — (7)  And  the  Angel  said 
to  me,  Why  dost  thou  wonder?  I  will  tell  thee  the 
mystery  of  the  woman,  and  of  the  beast  of  prey 
that  beareth  her,  which  hath  the  seven  heads  and 

8  the  ten  horns.  (8)  The  beast  of  prey  which  thou 
sawest,  was,  and  is  not ;  and  he  will  ascend  from 
the  abyss  and  go  into  perdition :  and  the  dwellers 
on  the  earth,  whose  names  are^  not  written  in  the 
book  of  life  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  will 
wonder  when  they  see  the  beast  of  prey,  which 

9  was,  and  is  not,  and  approacheth.  (9)  Here  is  in- 
telligence, for  him  who  hath  wisdom.  Those  seven 
heads  are  the  seven  mountains,  <i  on  which  the 

10  woman  sitteth.  (10)  And  there  are  seven  kings : 
of  whom  five  have  mllen,  one  exists,  and  the  other 
hath  not  yet  come ;  and  when  he  cometh  he  must 

11  continue  for  a  short  time.    (11)  And  the  beast  of 

Erey,  which  was  and  is  not,  is  the  eighth,  and  is 
•om  the  seven,  and  is  for  perdition.  (12)  And  the 
ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  are  ten  kings.  These 
persons  have  not  yet  received  royalty ;  but  they 
receive  authority,  as  if  kings,  with  the  beasts  of 

18  prey,  for  one  hour.  (13)  They  have  one  mind ;« 
and  they  will  give  their  power  and  authority  unto 

14  the  beast  of  prey.  (14)  They  will  make  war  upon 
the  Lamb;  and  the  Lamb  will  vanquish  them; 
because  he  is  Lord  of  lords,  and  King  of  kings,  and 
those  with  him  [are]  called  and  chosen  and  faithful. 

16  (16)  And  he  said  to  me :  The  waters  which  thou 
sawest,  where  the  harlot  sitteth,  are  peoples,  and 

16  multitudes,  and  nations,  and  tongues.  (16)  And 
the  ten  horns  which  thou  sawest,  and  the  beast  of 

Srey,  will  hate  the  harlot ;  and  they  will  make  her 
esolate  and  naked,  and  will  eat  her  flesh,  and 

17  bum  her  with  fire.  (17)  For  God  hath  put  into 
their  hearts,  to  do  his  pleasure,^  and  to  execute  one 
purpose,  and  to  give  their  kingdom  to  the  beast  of 
prey,  until  these  words  of  God  shall  be  fiilfiUed. 

li3  (18)  And  the  woman  whom  thou  sawest,  is  the 
great  city,?  which  hath  dominion  over  the  kings  of 
the  earth. 

XVm.   After  these  things,  I  saw  another  angel  come 


•  or,  martyrs. 


Sy.  name  is. 


Sy-W 


Sy.  UaO^, 
or,  laiU. 


Sy.  lAl-^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


464 


APOCALYPSE,    XVIIL 


^.  lZJa4j 


^  Sy.adheredto. 


%.  duplicate 
U>  her  double. 


down  from  heaven;  and  he  had  great  authoritj, 
and  the  earth  was  illumined  by  his  glory,    (2)  And    2 
he  cried  with  a  strong  voice,  saying:  Fallen,  fidlen, 
is  Babylon  the  great:  and  hath  become  a  cavern 
of  demons,  and  the  home*  of  every  unclean  spirit^ 
and  the  home  of  every  unclean  and  hateful  bird, 
and  the  home  of  every  unclean  and  hateftil  beast 
of  prey.    {S\  For  all  the  nations  have  drunken  of     8 
the  wine  of  ner  wrath ;  and  the  kings  of  the  earth 
have  practised  whoredom  with  her ;  and  the  mer- 
chants of  the  earth  have  been  enriched  by  the 
abundance  of  her    luxuries.— (4)   And  I  heard    4 
another  voice  from  heaven,  saying:  Come  ye  out 
of  her,  my  people ;  that  ye  may  not  participate  in 
her  sins,  and  may  not  partake  of  her  {uagues. 
f5)  For  her  sins  have  reached**  up  to  heaven ;  and    5 
God  hath  remembered  her  iniquities.    (6)  Becom*    6 
pense ye  to  her,  as  she  also  hath  recompensed;  and 
render  to  her  double, <*  according  to  her  deeds;  in 
the  cup  which  she  hath  mixed,  mix  ye  to  her  two- 
fold.   (7)  As  much  as  she  pleased  herself  with    7 
lasciviousness,  so  much  of  anguish  and  sorrow  give 
ye  to  her.    Because  she  saith  in  her  heart,  I  sit  a 
queen,  and  am  no  widow,  and  I  shall  see  no  sor- 
row; (8)  therefore,  in  one   day,  shall  these  her    8 
plagues  come,  death,  and  mourning,  and  femine ; 
and  she  shall  be  burned  with  fire :  mr  strong  is  the 
Lord  God  who  judgeth  her. — (9)  And  the  kings     9 
of  the  earth  who  committed  whoredom  and  were 
lascivious  with  her,  shall  weep,  and  mourn,  and  be- 
wail her,  when  they  shall  see  the  smoke  of  her 
burning,  (10)  standmg  afar  oS,  from  fear  of  her  10 
torment,  [and]  saying,  Alas,  alas !  that  great  city 
Babylon,  that  powerful  city ;  for  in  one  hour  is  thy 
judgment  come!     (11)  And  the  merchants  of  the  11 
eartn  will  mourn  over  her,  because  no  one  pur- 
chaseth  their  cargo;  (12)  no  more,  the  cargo  of  12 
gold,  and  silver,  and  precious  stones,  and  pearls, 
and  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and  silk,  and  scarlet, 
and  every  aromatic  wood,  and  all  vessels  of  ivory, 
and    all  vessels    of  very  precious  wood,  and  of 
brass,  and  of  iron,  and  of  marble,  (13)  and  cinna-  18 
mon,  and  amomum,  and  aromatics,  and  unguents, 
and  frankincense,  and  wine,  and  oil,  and  fine  flour, 
and  wheat,  and  beasts  of  burden,  and  sheep,  and 
horses,  and  chariots,  and  the  bodies  and  souls  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  XIX. 


405 


14 


16 


16 


17 


men.  (14)  And  the  fruits  which  thy  soul  desired, 
have  departed  from  thee ;  and  all  things  delicious 
and  splendid  have  perished  from  thee;  and  the 
traders  in  them  shall  obtain  them  no  more.  (16J 
And  they  who  were  enriched  from  her,  will  stand 
afar  off,  for  fear  of  her  torment ;  and  will  weep  and 
mourn,  (16)  saying:  Alas,  alasl  that  great  city, 
which  was  clothed  in  fine  linen,  and  purple,  and 
scarlet,  and  gilded  with  gold,  and  precious  stones, 
and  pearls;  because,  in  one  hour,  such  riches 
are  laid  waste.  (17)  And  every  pilot,  and  every 
navigator  to  the  place,  and  the  sailors,  and  all  who 

18  do  business  by  sea,  stood  afar  ofl^  (18)  and  cried, 
when  they  saw  the  smoke  of  her  burnmg,  saying : 

19  What  [other]  is  like  this  great  city!  (19)  And 
they  cast  dust  on  their  heads,  and  cried,  weeping, 
and  mourning,  and  saying :  Alas,  alas  I  that  great 
dty,  in  which  all  that  nave  ships  in  the  sea  became 
ricn,  by  her  preciousness ;  for  in  one  hour  she  hath 

20  become  desolate.— (20)  Rejoice  over  her,  O  heaven, 
and  ye  Angels,  and  Legates,  and  Prophets ;  because 

21  God  judgeth  your  cause**  with  her.— (21)  And  an 
angel  took  up  a  stone  like  a  great  millstone,  and 
cast  it  into  the  sea,  saying :  So  shall  Babylon,  the 
great  city,  be  thrown  down  with  violence,  and  shall 
no  more  be  found :  (22)  and  the  voice  of  harpers 
and  musicians  and  pipers  and  trumpeters,  shall  no 
more  be  heard  in  thee;  and  no  artificer  of  any 

28  trade,  shall  be  found  any  more  in  thee.  (23)  And 
the  light  of  a  candle,  shall  not  be  seen  in  thee ; 
and  the  voice  of  a  bridegroom  and  bride,  shall  no 
more  be  heard  in  thee :  lor  thy  merchants  were  the 
great  men  of  the  earth,  because  all  nations  were 
seduced  by  thy  sorceries.  (24)  And  in  her  was 
found  the  blood  of  prophets  and  saints,  and  of  all 
those  that  have  been  slam  on  the  earth. 


22 


24 


XTX.    And  after  these  things,  I  heard  a  loud  voice  of 

a  great  multitude  in  heaven,  saying :  Hallelujah 

Deliverance,  and  strength,  and  glory,  and  honor, 

2  unto  our  God :  (2)  for,  true  and  righteous  are  his 

judgments ;  for  he  hath  judged  that  great  harlot, 

T^ho  corrupted  the  earth  with  her  whoredom ;  and 

hath  avenged  the  blood  of  his  servants  at  her  hand. 

8  (3)    And  again   they  said:    Hallelujah:    and  her 

4  smoke  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever.    (4)  And 


*  ^y.jtbdgfMm 


Sy.  ]^a!^ai 


Digitized  by 


Google 


466 


APOCALYPSE,   XIX, 


sy  Vbn 


the  twenty-four  Elders  fell  down,  and  the  four 
Animals,  and  worshipped  God  who  sittcth  on  the 
throne,  saying:  Amen:  EUJlelujahl     (6)  And  a    5 
voice  came  forth  from  the  throne,  saying:  Praise 
oar  God,  all  ye  his  servants ;  and  such  as  fear  him, 
small  and  great    (6)  And  I  heard,  as  it  were  the    6 
voice  of  a  great  multitude,  and  as  the  voice  of  many 
waters,  and  as  the  voice  of  heavy  thunders,  saying: 
Hallelujah ;  for  our  Lord  God,  Omnipotent,  reign- 
eth.    (7)  Let  us  rejoice  and  exult,  and  give  glory    7 
to  him:  for  the  marriage  supper  of  the  lAmb  ham 
come,   and  his  bride  hath  made  herself  ready. 
(8)  And  it  was  granted  her  to  be  clothed  in  fine    8 
Unen,  bright  and  clean :  for  fine  linen  is  the  righ- 
teousnesses**  of  the  saints. — (9)  And  he  said  to  me,     9 
Write ;  Blessed  are  they  who  are  called  to  the  sup- 
per of  the  marriage  feast  of  the  Lamb.    And  he 
said  to  me.  These  my  [sayings]  are  the  true  words 
of  God.    (lO)  And  I  fell  at  his  feet,  to  worship  10 
him.     And  he  said  to  me,  See,  [thou  do  it]  not ; 
I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  those  thy  brethren 
who  have  the  testimony  of  Jesus.     Worship  ye 
God :  for  the  testimony  of  Jesus  is  the  spint  of 
prophecy. 

And  I  saw  heaven  opened:    and  lo,  a  white  11 
horse ;  and  he  that  sat  on  it,  is  called  Faithful  and 
True :  and  in  righteousness  he  judgeth,  and  maketh 
war.    (12)  His  eyes  [were]  like  a  flame  of  fire,  and  12 
on  his  head  [were]  many  diadems;   and  he  had 
names  inscribed ;  and  the  name  which  was  written 
on  him,  no  one  knew,  except  himself    (13)  And  18 
he  was  clothed  with    a  vesture  q)rinklea  with 
blood;  and  his  name  is  called.  The  Word  of  God.® 
(14)  And  the  soldiery  of  heaven  followed  him,  on  14 
white  horses,  clad  in  garments  of  fine  linen,  pure 
[and]  white.    (15)  And  from  his  mouth  issued  a  16 
sharp  two-edged  sword,  that  with  it  he  could  smite 
the  nations ;  and  he  will  rule  the  nations  with  a 
rod  of  iron ;  and  he  will  tread  the  wine-press  of  the 
wrath  of  God  Almighty.    (Id)  And  he  hath  upon  16 
his  vesture  and  upon  his  thign  the  words  written : 
Eang  of  kings,  and  Lord  of  lords.— (17)  And  I  saw  17 
an  angel  standing  in  the  sun  ;  and  he  cried  with  a 
loud  voice,  saying  to  all  the  fowls  that  fly  in  the 
midst  of  heaven:   Come  ye,  assemble  unto  this 
great  supper  of  God;   (18)  that  ye  may  eat  the  18 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,  XX. 


467 


flesh  of  kings,  and  the  flesh  of  captains  of  thou- 
sands, and  the  flesh  of  valiant  men,  and  the  flesh 
of  horses  and  of  those  who  sit  on  them,  and  the 
flesh  of  all  the  free-born  and  of  slaves,  and  of  the 

19  small  and  the  great. — (19)  And  I  saw  the  beast  of 
prey,  and  the  kings  of  the  earth,  and  their  warriors, 
that  they  assembled  to  wage  battle  with  him  who 
sat  on  the  [white]  horse,  and  with  his  warriors. 

20  (20)  And  the  beast  of  prey  was  captured,  and  the 
false  prophet  that  was  with  him,  who  did  those 
prodigies  before  him,  whereby  he  seduced  them 
who  had  received  the  mark  of  the  beast  of  prey 
and  who  worshipped  his  image.  And  they  were 
both  cast  alive  into  the  lake^  of  fire,  which  burneth 

21  with  sulphur.  (21)  And  the  rest  were  slain  by 
the  sword  of  him  that  sat  on  the  horse,  by  that 
[sword]  which  issueth  from  his  mouth:  and  all 

XX.  the  fowls  were  satiated  with  their  flesh. — (XX.)  And 
I  saw  an  angel  that  descended  from  heaven,  having 
the  key  of  the  abyss,  and  a  great  chain  in  his  hani 
2  (2)  And  he  seized  the  dragon,  the  old  serpent,  who 
is  the  Deceiver^  and  Satan,  who  seduced  the  whole 
habitable  world :  and  he  bound  him  a  thousand 
S  years.  (3)  And  he  cast  him  into  the  abyss,  and 
closed  and  sealed  upon  him ;  so  that  he  might  de- 
ceive the  nations  no  more,  until  these  thousand 
i rears  shall  be  completed :  but  after  that,  he  will  be 
oosed  for  a  little  time.  (4)  And  I  saw  thrones, 
and  [persons]  sat  on  them,  and  judgment  was  given 
to  them,  and  to  the  souls  that  were  beheaded  for 
the  testimony  of  Jesus  and  for  the  word  of  God: 
and  these  are  they  who  had  not  worshipped  the 
beast  of  prey,  nor  its  image,  neither  had  they  re- 
ceived the  mark  upon  their  forehead  or  on  their 
hand ;  and  they  lived  and  reigned  with  their  Mes- 

5  siah  those  thousand  years.     JS)   This  is  the  first 

6  resurrection.^     (6)  Blessed  and  noly  is  he  that  hath 

Sart  in  this  first  resurrection :  over  them  the  second 
eath  hath  no  dominion ;  but  they  shall  be, — [nay] 
are,  priests  of  God  and  of  his  Messiah ;  and  they 

7  will  reign  with  him  the  thousand  years. — (7)  And 
when  these  thousand  years  shall  be  completed, 

8  Satan  will  be  released  from  his  prison ;  (8)  and 
will  go  forth  to  seduce  the  nations  that  are  m  the 
four  comers  of  the  earth,  Gog  and  Magog ;  and  to 
assemble  them  for  battle,  whose  number  is  as  the 


Sy. 


1 1  ^VnjVft 


'  Sy,  I^LOa^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


468 


APOCALYPSE,    XXI. 


Sy. 


dSy  ^dAji 


Sy.  Olaph 
and  Tau. 


sand  of  the  sea.  (9)  And  they  went  up  on  the  9 
breadth  of  the  earth,  and  encompassed  the  camp  of 
the  saints,  and  the  beloved  city.  And  fire  came 
down  from  God  out  of  heaven,  and  consumed  them. 
(10)  And  the  Accuser^  ^ho  seduced  them,  was  cast  10 
into  the  lake  of  fire  and  sulphur,  where  also  were 
the  beast  of  prey  and  the  false  prophet :  and  they 
shall  be  tormented,  day  and  night,  for  ever  and  ever. 

And  I  saw  a  great  white  throne,  and  Him  who  11 
sitteth  thereon ;  from  whose  presence  the  earth  and 
heaven  fled  away,  and  this  their   place  was  not 
found.     (12)  And  I  saw  the  dead,  great  and  small,  12 
standing  before  the  throne;  and  the  books  were 
opened ;  and  another  book  was  opened,  which  is 
[the  book]  of  lite.     And  the  dead  were  judged 
from  the  things  written  in  the  books,  according  to 
their  deeds.     (13)  And  the  sea  gave  up  the  dead   13 
in  it ;  and  death  and  the  grave^  gave  up  the  dead 
in  them.     And  they  were  judged,  each  one  accord 
ing  to  his  deeds.     (14)  And  death  and  the  grave  14 
were  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.     This  is  the  second 
death,  [namely,]  this  lake  of  fire.    (15)  And  if  any   15 
one  was  not  found  enrolled  in  the  book  of  life,  he 
was  cast  into  this  lake  of  fire.   . 

And  I  saw  new  heavens,  and  a  new  earth :  for  XXI. 
the  former  heaven  and  the  former  earth  had  passed 
awav :  and  the  sea  was  no  more.     (2)  And  I  saw    2 
the  holy  city,  the  New  Jerusalem,  descending  from 
God  out  of  heaven,  prepared  like  a  bride  adorned 
for  her  husband.     (3)  And  I  heard  a  great  voice    8 
from  heaven,  which  said:  Behold,  the  tabernacle 
of  God  is  with  men ;  and  he  dwelleth  with  them : 
they  will  be  his  people;  and  God  will  be  with 
them,  a  God  to  them.     (4)  And  every  tear  will  be    4 
wiped  from  their  eyes ;  and  there  will  no  more  be 
death,  nor  mourning,  nor  wailing;  nor  shall  pain 
be  any  more  ;  because  the  former  things  are  passed 
away.     (5)  And  He  who  sat  on  *the  throne,  said :     5 
Behold,  I  make  all  things   new.     And  he  said* 
Write;    because  these  are  the  faithful  and   true 
words  of  God.     (6)  And  he  said  to  me:    I  am     6 
Alpha  and  Omega,  *  the  Beginning  and  the  Com- 
pletion :  to  him  who  thirsteth,  will  I  give  of  the 
fountain  of  living  water,  gratis.     (7)  He  that  over-     7 
dometh,  shall  inherit  these  things ;  and  I  will  be  his 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,    XXI. 


469 


8  GkxJ,  and  he  shall  be  my  son.  (8)  But  to  the  timid, 
and  the  unbelieving,  and  to  the  sinful,  and  polluted, 
and  to  manslayers,  and  whoremongers,  and  sorcer- 
ers, and  idolaters,  and  to  all  false  persons,  their 
portion  shall  be  in  the  lake  that  burneth  with  fire 

9  and  sulphur,  which  is  the  second  death. — (9)  And 
there  came  one  of  those  seven  angels,  who  have  the 
seven  cups  filled  with  the  seven  last  plagues,  and 
talked  with  me,  saying:  Come,  I  wiU  show  thee 

10  the  bride,  the  wife  of  the  Lamb.  (10)  And  he  bore 
rae  away  in  the  spirit,  to  a  mountain  great  and 
high,  and  he  showed  me  the  holy  citv,  Jerusalem, 

11  descending  out  of  heaven  firom  God ;  (11)  in  which 
was  the  glory  of  God,  as  a  brilliant  lignt,  and  re- 
sembling a  very  precious  gem ;  like  a  jasper  stone, 

12  resembling  crystal.  (12)  And  it  had  a  wall  great 
and  lofty,  which  had  twelve  gates,  and  names  in- 
scribed on  them,  which  are  the  names  of  the  twelve 

18  tribes  of  the  children  of  Israel.  (13)  On  the  east, 
three  gates;  on  the  north,  three  gates;  [on  the 
south,  three  gates ;  and  on  the  west,  three  gates]. 

14  (14)  And  the  wall  of  the  city  had  twelve  founda- 
tions, and  upon  them  the  twelve  names  of  the 

15,  twelve  legates  of  the  Lamb.  (15)  And  he  that 
talked  with  me,  had  a  measure,  a  golden  reed ;  so 
that  he  could  measure  the  city,  and  its  gates,  and 

16  its  wall.  {16)  And  the  city  stood  up  four  square ; 
and  its  lengtn  was  the  same  as  its  breadth.  And 
he  measured  the  city  with  the  reed,  to  twelve  fur- 
longs of  twelve  thousand  ;*»  and  the  length  and  the 
breadth  and  the  height  of  it  were   [all]   equal. 

17  (17)  And  he  measured  its  wall,  a  hundred  and  forty 
ana  four  mea^sures  of  the  cubits  of  a  man,  that  is, 

18  of  the  angel.  (18)  And  the  structure  of  its  wall 
[was  of]  jasper;  and  the  city  was  of  pure  gold, 

19  like  pure  glass.  (19)  And  the  foundations  of  the 
wall  of  the  city  were  adorned  with  every  precious 
stone.  The  first  foundation,  a  jasper ;  the  second, 
a  sapphire ;  the  third,  a  chalcedony ;  the  fourth,  an 

20  emerald;  (20)  the  fifth,  a  sardonyx;  the  sixth,  a 
sardius;  the  seventh,  a  chrysolite;  the  eighth,  a 
beryl;  the  ninth,  a  topaz;  the  tenth,  a  chryso- 
prasus;  the    eleventh,  a  jacinth;   the  twelfth,  an 

21  amethyst.  (21)  And  the  twelve  gates  [were]  twelve 
pearls ;  each  [pearl]  one  gate,  and  each  [gate]  one 
pearl :  and  the  broad  street  of  the  city  was  pure 


»>  Gr.  to  13,000 
furhngi. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


470 


APOCALYPSE,   XXIL 


Bf. 


Sy.^JAl 


gold,  like  brilliant  glaaa.    (22)  And  I  saw  no  tern-  22 
pie  in  it;  for  the  I^rd  Almighty  is  its  temple,  and 
the  Lsunb.    (28)  And  the  city  hath  no  need  of  the  23 
sun  or  of  the  moon,  to  enlighten  it ;  for  the  glory 
of  Gk>d  enlighteneth  it,  and  the  Lamb  is  the  lamps 
of  it    (24)  And   the    nations   that  were  savec^c  24 
shall  walk  by  means  of  its  light,  and  the  kings  of 
the  earth  will  bring  their  glorjr  and  the  wealth  of 
the  nations  into  it.     (25)  And  its  gates  shall  not  be  25 
shut  by  day  ;  for  there  is  no  night  there.  (26)  And  26 
they  will  bring  the  glory  and  honor  of  the  nations 
into  it    (27)  And  there  shall  not  enter  it,  any  27 
thing  polluted,  or  that  praotiseth  impurity  and 
falsehood;   but  they  who  are  registered  in  the 
Lamb's  book  of  life.    (XXII.)  And  he  showed  XXTT. 
me  a  river  of  living  water,  transparent  [as]  crystal, 
which  proceeded  from  the  throne  of  GFod  and  the 
Lamb.    (2)  And  in  the  middle  of  its  broad  avenue,     2 
and  near  the  river,  on  this  side  and  on  that,  [was] 
the  tree  of  life ;  which  bore  twelve  [sorts  of]  n-uits, 
yielding  one  of  its  fruits  each  month:   and  the 
leaves  of  the  tree  [were]  for  the  healing  of  the  na- 
tions.   (S)  And  there  will  be  no  blight*  any  more :    3 
and  the  tnrone  of  God  and  the  Lamb  will  be  in  it ; 
and  his  servants  will  minister  to  him.     (4)  And    4 
they  will  see  his  fece,  and  his  name  [will  be]  on 
their  foreheads.    (5)  And  there  will  be  no  more    5 
night;  and  they  have  no  need  of  the  light  of  a 
candle,  or  of  the  light  of  the  sun ;  because  the  Lord 
Ood  giveth  them  light:  and  they  will  reign  for 
ever  and  ever. 

And  he  said  to  me:  These  words  [are]  faithful    6 
and  true.     And  the  Lord  God  of  the  spirit  of  the 
prophets,  hath  sent  me,  his  angel,  to  show  unto  his 
servants  the  things  that  must  soon. occur.    (7)  And,     7 
lOy  I  come  quickly :  Blessed  is  he  that  keepeth  the 
words  of  the  prophecy  of  this  book. — (8)  And  more-    8 
over  I  am  John,  the  hearer  and  the  seer  of  these 
things.     And  when  I  heard  and  saw,  I  fell  down  to 
worshio  at  the  feet  of  the  angel  who  showed  me 
these  things.    (9)  And  he  said  to  me :  See,  [thou    9 
do  it]  not:  I  am  thy  fellow-servant,  and  of  thy 
brethren  the  prophets,  and  of  them  that  observe  the 
words  of  this  book.     Worship  God.    (10)  And  he  10 
said  to  me :  Seal  not  the  words  of  the  prophecy  of 
this  book ;  for  the  time  is  near.    (11)  He  that  doth  11 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APOCALYPSE,    XXII. 


471 


evil,  let  him  do  evil  still ;  and  he  that  is  filthy,  let 
him  be  filthy  still ;  and  he  that  is  riffhteous,  let  him 

f)ractise  righteousness  still ;  and  he  mat  is  sanctified, 
et  him  be  sanctified  still. — (12)  Behold,  I  come 
quickly;  and  my  reward  is  with  me,  to  recompense 

18  every  one  according  to  his  work.  (13)  I  am  Alpha 
and  Omega,**  the  First  and  the  Last,  the  Com- 

14  mencement  and  the  Completion. — (14)  Blessed  are 
they  who  do  his  commandments,  that  they  may 
have  a  right^  to  the  tree  of  life,  and  may  enter 

16  through  the  gates  into  the  city.  (15)  Without 
[will  be]  dogs,  and  sorcerers,  and  whoremongers, 
and  manslayers,  and  idolaters,  and  every  one  that 

16  loveth  and  doeth  falsehood.— (16)  I  Jesus  have 
sent  my  angel,  to  testify  to  you  these  things  before 
the  churches.  I  am  the  root  and  offspring  of  Da- 
vid: like  the  splendid    star  of  the    morning. — 

17  (17)  And  the  Spirit  and  the  bride  say.  Come  thou. 
And  let  him  that  heareth,  say.  Come  thou.  And 
let  him  who  thirsteth,  come ;  and  he  that  is  inclined, 
let  him  take  the  living  water  gratis. 

18  I  testify  to  every  one  that  heareth  the  words 
of  the  prophecy  of  this  book,  that  if  any  one  shall 
add  to  them,  God  will  add  to  him  the  plagues  that 

19  are  written  in  this  book.  (19)  And  if  any  one 
shall  take  awav  fi'om  the  words  of  the  book  of  this 
prophecy,  God  will  take  away  his  portion  from  the 
tree  of  life,  and  from  the  holy  city,  which  are  de- 

20  scribed  in  this  book. — (20)  BLe  who  testifieth  these 
things,  saith :  Yes,  I  come  quickly. — Amen.  Come, 
Lord  Jesus  I 

21  The  grace  of  our  Lord  Jesus  the  Messiah,  [be] 
with  all  the  saints.    Amen. 

End  of  the  Revelation  of  John  ihe  Evangelist ;  and  of  the 
whole  New  Testament^  as  translated  into  the  language  of  the 
Syrians,*^ 


^  By.  Olaph 
and  Tau, 

Sy. 


gy.L^YOfio 


^latu  \ah  dNL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  I. 


DISTEIBDTIOH  OF  THE  SYRIAC  NEW  TESTAMENT  INTO  LESSONS 

AS  READ  IN  THE  PUBLIC  WOBSHIP. 


Thb  manuscripts  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  are  strangers  to  the 
modem  division  of  the  Books  into  Chapters  and  Verses :  instead  of  which, 
they  divide  the  several  Books  (except  the  Apocalypse)  into  reading  Les- 
aofw,  |Xdi|,0,  which  are  of  different  lengths,  but  will  average  about  fifteen 
of  our  verses. 

The  printed  Syriac  New  Testaments  exhibit  our  division  into  Qiaptere 
and  Verses,  marked  commonly  in  the  side  margin.  The  text  of  the 
London  editions  of  1816  and  1826  (which  were  intended  for  circulation /in 
the  East)  is  divided  (except  the  Apocalypse)  into  paragraphs  correspond- 
mg  with  the  reading  Lessons  in  the  common  manuscripts.  These  Lessons 
are  separately  numbered  in  each  Book,  and  the  occasions  are  stated  on 
which  they  are  to  be  read. — This  distribution  into  reading  Lessons,  its 
correspondence  with  the  division  into  Chapters  and  Verses,  and  the 
occasions  to  which  the  Lessons  are  appropriated,  are  contained  in  the 


following  Table : — 

Lessons  for  Public  Worship. 

Thib  occaaiont  whieh  we  starred  [  *  ]  are  omitted  in  the  edUion  of  18S6. 


^ 


l^ 


I. 

a 
m. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

vn 
vni. 


Matthkw. 
Chap,  and  Ver. 


i.  1-17 
18-26 

ii.  1-12 
13-18. 
19-23. 

iii.    1-17, 

iv.  1-11, 
12-26. 


occasions. 


Sunday  before  Christmas  (V  V>) 

The  Revelation  to  Joseph. 

Vespers  of  Christmas  (\\  -J  ).a^5)* 

Matins  (ls^»  )  of  Shiughter  of  the  Infants, 

Oblation  ("^50-0)  at  Slaughter  of  the  Infants. 

Feast  of  Epiphany  (]jsO>>  l?l^)- 

(Sunday,  commencement  of  tent  (]Ldo»):  and,  Obia 
tion  of  the  YoriyIyy^^^^%^^/  .      ^ 
Sunday  after  Epiphany  (^k>J}).~^ 


^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


474 


APPENDIX   L 


Lessons  for  Pubuo  Worship — Continued 


W^ 


^oi> 


IV 


DC. 
X. 

XL 

xn. 

XDL 

XIV. 

XV 

XVI. 

xvu. 
xvm. 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXL 

xxn. 
'    j,.,xxin, 

XXIV 
XXV. 
XXVL 

xxva 
xxvra. 

XXIX 
XXX. 

XXXI. 

-  xxxn 
xxxra, 

-  xxxiv. 
xxxv. 
xxxvi. 

xxxvn. 

xxxvni. 
xxxix. 

XL. 
XU. 

XUI. 

XLIII. 

XLIV. 

XLV. 

XLVI. 
XLVII. 
XLVIII 
^XUX. 
'  .  L. 
U. 
LII 


T.    1-20. 

20-48. 

vL    1-16. 

16-24. 

25-84. 

vii.    1-12. 

13-29. 

vui.    1-13. 

14-22 

viii.  23- 

ix.    8. 

Lx.    9-17' 

18-26 

27-36. 

ix.  36- 

X.  16 

X.  16-33. 

34-42 

xi    1-16. 

"«U24 

xL  26- 

xii.    8 

XU.    9-21 

22-37. 

38-60. 

xiii.    1-23. 

24-62. 

xiii.  63 

xiv.  14. 

xiv.  16-23. 

24-36 

XV.    1-20. 

21-31 

;    XV.  32-    j 

I  xvi.  12.     < 

xvi.  13-20'. 

21-27. 

I  xvi.  28-    ) 

I  xvii.  13.     J 

xvii.  14-21. 

22-27 

xviii.    1-14 

16-22 

23-35 

xix.    1-15. 

16-26. 

27-30. 

XX.    1-16 

17^8. 

29-34. 


(  viii.  23-    ) 

j    ix.    8.     J 

Lx.    9-17. 

18-26. 

27-36. 

(    ix.  36-    ) 

\      X.16.     ] 


(    xL26-    ) 
\   XU.    8.     ] 


(  xiii.  63-    / 
]  xiv.  14.     S 


The  Apostles  and  Patriarchs 
Matins,  Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  L«nt 
Matins,  Wednesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent^ « 
Monday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent      .  •        *  M^T^^ 
Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent  ^» 

Tuesday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent  •♦ 

Matins  on  Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent 
Lessoji  for  Vespers,  2d  Sunday  in  Lent 
Tesson,  Oblation,  1st  Saturday  in  T 

Vespers,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent 

Thursday  of  Week  jiLAlMflU 

^Commem oration  of  the  Deadi^ 

Fridav  of  6th  Week  in  Lent  ^ 


Lent    ' 


Commemoration  of  the  holy  Apostles.* 

♦Commemoration  of  the  holy  Martyrs. 
Jjygoj^or  the  Dea^. 
Oblation,  Decapitation  of  John. 
Monday  of  3d  Week  hi  Lent 

Vespers,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Saturday  of  3d  Week  in  Lent 

Vespers,  the  Sunday  commenei 
♦Vespers,  Commemoration  of  the, 

Wednesday,  2d  Week  in  Lent 
♦Oblation,  Sunday  of  Priests. 

Vespers,  Decapitation  of  John. 

Oblation  on  any  day. 

Vespers,  2d  Sunday  after  the  ResnrreeiioiL 

Sunday  after  Pentecost    - 

Vespers,  4th  Sunday  in  Lent 

Oblation  on  any  day. 

Commemoration  of  the  holy  Apostles.  - 
2d  Sunday  after  Pentecost  - 

♦Vespers,  Feast  of  the  Slaughtered.    .  *'  ^  '^ 

Monday,  3d  Week  in  Lent  "  r.  ^  v  -- 

Tuesday,  3d  Week  in  Lent  '^       »' 

3d  Sunday  after  Pentecost  — 

4th  Sunday  after  Pentecost  -- 

Friday,  2d  Week  in  licnt 
♦Matins,  Sunday  after  Feast  of  the  Cross. 
♦Commemoration  of  F.  Anthony  and  his  BreHnea 

Matins,  Feast  of  ,£fiter^the  Apostle. 

Lesson  for  Paul  the  Apostle. 

6th  Sunday  after  Pentecost  v. 

Oblation,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent. 


DigitizeT^^OOgle 


APPENDIX    I. 


475 


LsBSONS  FOR  Public  Worship — Continued, 


MATTHEW. 


LIIL 

liV. 

Uj^  ^         LV. 

-r"^  >     LVL 

^    LVII 

LVIII 


[i^^ 


LXVII. 

LXVIIL 

^"••^^     LXIX. 

'\'M  LXXU, 

\       LXXIII. 

LXXIV. 

LXXV. 

LXXVL 

LXXVIL 


Chap,  and  Ver. 


xxi.     1-16. 

17-27. 

28-46. 

xxii.    1-14. 

16-22. 

33-33. 

( xxii.  34-    ) 

(xxiil  12.     ( 

xxiii.  13-28. 

29-39. 

xxiv.    1-35. 

36-44. 

46-61. 

XXV.    1-13. 

14-30. 
31-46. 

xxvi.    1-16. 

17-30. 

31-76. 
xxvii.    1-26. 

26-37 

38-44. 

46-66. 

67-61. 

62-66. 
xxviiL    1-20. 


OCCASIONS. 


Vespers,  Sunday  of  Hosannas  (Palm  Sunday.) 
Lesson  for  Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent         ./ 
2d  Stgliflak2d  Night  jn  Passion  Week. 
1st  Service.  2u  Nighfin  i^assion  WeeK. 
Vespers,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week.  /   .  .  ■ 
♦Lftsaon  for  the  Dead. 


MARK. 
L         i 


IL 

III 

IV. 
V. 

VI. 

vn. 

VHL 

IX. 
X. 

XI. 
-MI, 

xm. 

XIV. 
XV. 
XVL 

KVIL 


{    m. 


V. 

vi. 


1-13. 
14-34.' 
36-46. 

1-13. 
14-22. 
23-  ) 
12.  \ 
13-30. 
31-  ) 
23.  ) 
24-34. 
36-41. 

1-20. 
21-43. 

1-  6. 

7-13. 
14-29. 
30-46. 
47-66. 


Matins,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Week.  .'  i   v^ 

1st  Station,  3d  Night  in  Passion  Week.        -  ^  »  < 

2d  jgllp^g,  3d  Night  in  Passion  Week ;  and,  of  Stephen. 

♦Vespers  on  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

*Lesson  ibr  the  Dead. 

♦OblaSon,  Sunday  of  Priests. 
3d  StMjon,  2d  Night  in  Passion  Week: 

♦Also,  Commemoration  of  the  holy  Women. 

♦Sunday  of  the  Priests.  ""' *^ 

Commemoration  of  the  Just  and  Ris^hteous : 
Also,  Friday  in  Albis,  (vVtiitsun  Week.).     - 
Thursday  of  the  Mysteries,  (\\\Y)  Holy  Thursday. 

♦Also,  Consecration  of  the  Chrism^  same  day. 
Thursday  of  Mysteries,  (l^assioii  week.) 
Night  of  Friday  of  the^Cr\^cifixion.  ^ 

Matins,  Friday  of  theTfUJHMlUli.  '         '^ .  x-  ■  <  -.  >     *' 
Lesson  for  the  3d  Hour^ron  Day  of  Crucifixion.) 
Lesson  for  the  6th  HourT  (Noon,  Day  of  Crucifixion.) 
Lesson  for  ^e  9th  Hour,  (Day  of  the  Crucifixion.) 
Vespers,  Sattif day  of  Annu)*Mation.  ^       ., 

Matins,  Saturday  of  Annuncihtion. 
Vespers,  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection. 


Lesson,  Feast  of  Epiphany. 

Vespers,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Matins,  2d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent. 

Matins,  3d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection* 

Fourth  Saturday  in  Lent. 

6th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

♦Matins,  Commemoration  of  Marj^Mother  of  God 

Sa.turday^in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
Thursday,  bth  Week  in  Lent. 
Matins,  Thursday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 
♦LessQn,  the  Martyrs,  and  the  Dead. 
Oblation,  6th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
7th  Sunday  after  E^^b^ny. 
Matins,  Decapitation  oKlohn  Baptist 
Oblation,  any  Day. 
Lesson,  for  any  Day,  in  general. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


476 


APPENDIX    I. 


Lessons  for  Pubuo  Worship — Continued. 


MARK. 


Olia|».  and  Ver. 


OOOABIOKB, 


xvm. 

XIX. 

-       XX. 

XXL 

xxn. 
•xxm. 

XXIV, 

XXV, 

XXVI. 

XXVIL 

xxvm. 

XXIX. 
XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

'Xxxm. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 
XXXVI. 

XXXVIL 

xxxvra. 

XXXIX. 
XL. 

XLI. 

XLU. 
XLUI 


▼iL    1-23. 

24-87. 
viiL    1-10. 

11-33. 

34-38. 

IX.  1-13. 
14-32. 
33-60. 

X.  1-16. 
17-27. 
28-34, 
35-52. 

xi.    1-18. 

19- 
xii.  17. 

18-27 

28-40. 
xu.  41- 
xiii.  37 
xiv.    1-26. 

27-72 
1-20, 

2i-2a 

29-32. 

33-41 
XV.  42 
xvi    1 

2-13, 

14-20. 


i   xii.  17.     f 

18-27. 

28-40. 

j    xii.  41-    ) 

i  xiii.  37.     ) 


XV. 


C    XV.  42-    ) 
Ixvi    1.     \ 


Lesson  for  Mid  Lent 

Matins,  4th  Sunday  in  Lent 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

Thursday  of  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.;  ! 

*Lesson  tor  the  Martyrs. 
♦Oblation,  on  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  ^    '       >' 

Sunday,  4th  Week  in  Lent  ^.  ^  ' 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost-^*  ^ _  ^  _ ; 

Blpsaing  fl  Bridegroom  and  Bride.  -*  *  '^' — — ^  "•"*     - 

Vespers,  4th  Sunday  after  Epiphany^ 

Peter  the  Apostle. 

Oblation,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent 

Matins,  Hosanna  Sunday,  (Palm  Sunday.) 

Saturday,  2d  Week  in  Lent 

♦Oblation  for  the  Dead. 
Matins,  4th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

♦Matins,  on  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

♦Consecration  of  the  Chrism,  (on  Holy  Thursday.) 
"'ight  of  the  Crucifixion.  _^^^/  »  ^' 

atins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion.  A  ~  -  ■  - 

hird  Hour  (=  9,  a.  m.)  Day  of  Crucifixion. 
Mid-day,  (noon,)  on  Day  of  Crucifixion. 
Ninth  Hour,  (=  3.  p.  m.)  Day  of  Crucifixion. 

Vespers,  Saturday  In  Passion  Week. 

Oblation,  Sunday  of  Resurrection,  (Easter  Sunday.) 
Oblation,  on  Ascension  Day, 


LUKE. 


L 

n. 
.,  m. 

IV. 

V. 

VL 

VII. 

vm. 

IX. 
X. 

XL 

xnL 

XIV. 
XV 
XVI. 

xvn. 
xvia 

XIX 


i.  1-25. 

26-38. 

39-56. 

57-80. 
iL    1-20. 

21-35. 

36-41. 

42-52. 
iii.    1-22. 

23-38. 
iv.    1-13. 

14-30. 

31-44. 
V.    1-1 L 

12-39. 
vi.    1-11. 

12-19. 

20-36. 

37-49. 


^-Matins,  Annunciation  to  Zacharias.  ^  -  ^_  \1 '_  _, 

Annunciation  to  the  Mother  of  Grod. 
.,  -Viai^  n£.  ^l^ry  to  Elizabeth. 
Matins,  Nativity  of  John. 
Matins,  Feast  of  the  Nativity,  (Christmas.) 
Matins,  Entrance  of  our  J^ord  into  the  Temple. 
Oblation,  our  Lord's  Entrance  into  the  Temple 
Sunday  after  the  Nativity.  A^O^^ 

Oblation,  Feast  of  Epiphany,  pj\ 

Vespers,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany,     /wjs/^ 
Sunday,  commencement  of  licnt     "^   '^ 
Circumcision  of  our  Lord. 
Vespers,  4th  Friday  in  Lent. 
Matins,  2d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
Matins,  Sunday,  5th  Week  in  Lent 
Matins,  Tuesday,  5th  Week  in  Lent  ^j 

ThejLpQsUes;  ♦and  the  Martyrs^       a  ^ 

Friday,  4th  Week  in  Lent.      ^^^^^^  \\oX, 
Vespers,  Wednesday,  Weak'^efbre  Lent 

♦And  Commemoration  of  the  PatriarcF 


■■> 


:,j 


Digitized  by  ^ 


APPENDIX    I. 


477 


Lessons  for  Public  Worship — Continued. 


LUKE. 


Leesoni. 

Chap,  and  Ver. 

XX. 

vii.     1-10. 

XXL 

11-18 

XXIL 

19-36. 

XXIIL 

36-60. 

XXIV. 

viii.     1-16. 

XXV. 

16-21. 

XXVL 

22-39. 

XXVU. 

40-66. 

XXVIIL 

ix.     1-11. 

XXIX. 

12-17. 

XXX. 

18-26. 

XXXI. 

27-36. 

XXXII. 

37-60. 

XXXIII. 

61-62. 

XXXIV. 

X.     1-24, 

XXXV. 

26-37. 

XXXVl. 

38-41. 

XXXVli. 

xi.     1-13. 

XXXVIII. 

14-26. 

XXXIX. 

27-36. 

XL. 

37-48, 

XLI. 

49-64. 

XLIL 

xii.    1-12. 

XLIII. 

13-31. 

XUV. 

32-48. 

'vo^      '      XLV. 

49-69. 

XLVL 

xiii.    1-  9. 

XLVIL 

10-22. 

XLVIIL 

23-36. 

XLLX. 

xiv.    1-24. 

L. 

i  26-  ) 
(   XV.  10.     J 

U. 

11-32. 

LU. 

xvi.    1-18. 

UIL 

19-31. 

UV. 

xvii.    1-10. 

LV. 

11-19. 

LVL 

20-37. 

Lvn. 

xviiL    1-17. 

LVIII. 

18-30. 

UX. 

i  31-  I 
\  xii.27. 

LX. 

28-40. 

uA  :^\      LXL 

41-48. 

LXIL 

XX.    1-26. 

LXUL 

27-40. 

LXIV. 

(  41-  ) 
1  xxi.   4.     \ 

LXV. 

6-28. 

Oblation,  Sunday,  4th  Week  in  Lent  ,   - 

Oblation,  Sunday,  6th  Weei(  in  Lent. 
Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Third  Hour,  Thursday  .of  the  Mysteries. 
Thursday,  2d  Week  in  Lent. 
♦Commemoration  of  Mary  the  Mother  of  God. 
Vespers,  6th  Sunday  in  Lient 
Matins,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent.  «. 

Vespers,  6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection.    ) 
And  Commemoration  of  the  Apostlga 
Oblation  on  any  Day. 


OOCASIONS. 


Peast  of  the  Apostles. 
"MatmS,  F 


Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

Monday,  2d  Week  in  Lent 

Vespers,  6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Wednesday,  Week  jn  Albig^  (Whitsun  Week.) 

Vespers,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent 
♦Commemoration  of  the  Holy  Women.- 

Vespers,  Tuesday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 

Tuesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 
♦Feast  of  Mary. the  Mother  of  God. 

Wednesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  Annunciation  to  Zacharias. 
♦Commemoration  of  the  Martyrs.  • 

Friday,  3d  Week  in  Lent 
♦Lesson  for  (the  Ordination  of)  Bishops. 

Lesson  for  SupHcation,  (Feast,  or  Fast,  of  the  NineVites.) 
*Lesson,  2d  Sunday  after  the  Feast  of  the  Cro88>-- 
^  xVespers,  5th  Sapifday  in  Lent. 
♦Commemoration  of  ^e  Just,  snd  the  Patriarchs. , 
'Tuesday,  4th  WeekTh  Lent 

♦Commemi)ration  of  the  Monks. 

Vespeip,  Thursday  betiwe  Lent 

Matins,  Sunday  comfbehcing  Lent  ' 
♦Vespers,  Sunday  of  the  Dead.'       — 

Vespers,  Friday,  lat  Week  in  Lent 

Oblation,  Sunday  of  2d  Week  in  Lent 

Thursday,  3d  Week  in  Lent. 

Vespers,  Ist  Saturday  in  Lent 
♦Commemoration  of  F.  Anthony  and  his  fellow  Saints 

Thursday,  6th  Week  in  Lent 

Sunday  of  Hosannas,  (Palm  Sunday.) 
Vespers,  Monday  of  Passion  Week. 
3d  Station,  3d  Night  ip  Passion  Week.    |-  . 
♦Lesson  for  the  Dead.  * 

Oblation,  6th  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  on  FeasTof-thtt^^iraetfixion. 


Ai, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


478 


APPENDIX   I. 


Lbssons  for  Pubuo  W0B8HIP — Continued, 


LUKE.- 


LXVI. 
LXVU. 

Lxvm. 

LXIX. 

LXX 

LXXL 

LXXIL 

Lxxm. 

LXXIV. 
LXXV. 


Chap,  md  Yar. 


xxi 
xxii. 


ZXUl. 


(xxiv. 


29-38. 
1-80. 
81-65. 
66-  ) 
25.  S 
26-88. 
34-43. 
44-49. 
60-  ) 
12.  ] 
13-36. 
36-63. 


OOCASIQira. 


Vespera,  Sunday  after  J 

Vespers,  Friday  of  the  6fucifixion. 

Lesson,  Night  of  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matinsi  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Third  Hour,  on  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Midday,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Ninth  Hour,  on  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Twilight,  Saturday  of  Annutfmtion. 

Monday  of  Week  in  Albis,'( Whitsun  Week.) 
The  Ascension  of  our  Lord. 


(/jUawT 


JOHN. 


.^ 


L 

n. 
in. 

IV. 
V. 
VL 

VIL 

vm 

JX. 
X. 

XL 

xn. 

XIIL 
XIV. 
XV. 
XVI. 

xvn. 
xvm. 

XIX 

XX 

XXL 

xxn. 
xxm. 

XXIV. 
XXV. 

xxvi. 


XXVII 

XXVUI 

XXIX. 


u. 


1-17. 
18-28. 
29-42. 
43-6L 

1-11 
12-22. 
23-  ) 
12.  \ 
13-21 
22 

3. 

4-42. 


I  ...1:  [ 


V. 


VI. 


43-64. 

1-18. 
19-29. 
30-47. 

1-16. 
16-29. 
80-46. 
47-60. 
61-71. 

1-36. 
37-44. 
46-62. 
63-  > 
11.  \ 
12-27. 
28-69. 
.  1-41. 
,    1-21. 

22-42. 

1-46. 

47-64. 


vFeast,  Nativity  of  our  Lord,  (Christmas.) 
Matins,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Oblation,  Sunday  after  Epiphany.  ^^ 

Oblation,  3d  Sunday  after  Epiphany.     /Yi^ 
Matins,  Sunday  commencing  Lent.  '^ 
Oblation*  Saturday  of  Resurrection  pf  I«azami. 

Matins,  Sunday  after  Epiphany^ 

Matins,  Mid  Lent 

Oblation  at  Dedication  of  >  the  Church. 

Night  of  consecrating  Water,  (at  Epiphany.)  > 
"'And,  thejjrenuflectlQn  at  Pentecost 

Vespers,  Tuesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent 

Matins,  3d  Sunday  in  Lent 
♦Lesson  for  the  Dead. 
Latins,  3d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Oblation,  4th  Sunday  after  EpipHany. 

Wednesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

Oblation,  any  Day. 

Matins,  Wednesday  of  P^aaiftJ^^^ek. 

Matins,  Wednesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent 
"'Commemoration  of  Doctors  of  the  Church." 

Matins,  Saturday,  5th  Week  in  Lent 

Lesson  of  the  sinning  Woman :  [not  in  MSS.] 

Oblation,  2d  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Wednesday  of  Week  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
Matins,  6th  Sunday  in  Lent 
Vespers,  Consecration  of  the  Church  r> 
*And,  Creation  of  Bishops.  ^ 

Lesson,  at  Consecration  of  the  Chuic£t     ' 
Oblation  of  the  Forty  [Marty'rs'J 
Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week.  / 


y 


Cj^^ 


Digitized  by 


^^^)Hi; 


APPENDIX   I. 


479 


Lbssons  fob  Public  Wobship — Continued. 


JOHN. 


XXX. 
XXXI. 

xxxn. 
xxxm. 
xxxiv. 

XXXV. 
XXXVI. 

xxxvn. 
xxxvm. 

XXXIX. 
XL. 

xu. 

XUL 

XLIIL 

XLIV. 

XLV. 

XLVL 

XLVU. 

XLVIIL 

XUX. 

L. 

LL 

UL 


UlL 


0luip.uidV6r. 


XV. 


XVI. 


xL66-  > 
xii.  11.     S 

12-22. 

23-60. 
xiii.    1-30. 

31-38. 
xiv.    1-14. 

16-    > 

'^^     ) 
8- 

3.      I 

4-16. 

16-30. 

XVIL  12.      ) 

13-26. 
xviii    1-27. 

28- 
xix.    4. 
6-14. 

14-22. 

23-30. 

31-42. 
XX.    1-18. 

19-26. 

26-31. 
xxi.    1-14. 

16-19. 


20-26. 


\^'i\ 


OOOASIQNa 


Matins,  Saturday  of  Resurrection  of  Lazaros. 

Hosanna  Sunday,  (Palm, Sunday.)  . 

Matins,  Wedil^a}'  of  Passion  Week.  ' '  *  ^  '    ' 

^Lesaonof  the  my stiial Washing  (of  Feet)    r     (Ao  .  i 
Matins,  6th  Sunday  al-er  the  Resurrection.     '     » 
Commemoration  of  Thomas  and  Philip,  ^postle^ 

Vespers,  Pentecostal  Sunday. 

Matins,  Pentecostal  Sund&yiya.^'&B^  (Whitsunday.) 

Oblation,  Pentecost,  (Whitsunday.) 

Vespers,  3d  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Matins,  6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection  : 
♦And,  atCreatJQ^  of  Presbyters.  ^        — - 
*3d  Suiioay  after  the  Feast  of  the  Cross. 

Night,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Third  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion, 

Sixth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion.     ,      ;  v  ^  ' 

Vespers,  Saturday  of  the  Annp<*^tion.  ^"^  ' 
^Matins,  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection,  (Easter  Day.) 

Vespers,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Matins,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Oblation,  New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Commemoration  of  Simon  Peter :  and, 

Consecration  of  the  Church :  and 
♦Creation  of  Bishops. 

Commemoration  of  John  the  Evangelist.  — 


v'^ 


Aom 


I. 

L    1-14. 

a. 

16-26. 

11. 

IL    1-21. 

IV. 

22-36. 

V. 

37-47. 

VL 

ill    1-10. 

VIL 

11-26. 

vin. 

iv.    1-18. 

K. 

19-31. 

X. 

32-37. 

XL 

V.     1-11. 

xn. 

12-28. 

xin. 

29-42. 

XIV. 

v;.    1-12. 

XV. 

j          13-    ) 
'     vii.  10. 

Ascension  of  our  Lord. 

Oblation,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 

The  Genuflection. 

TwifigTit,  great  "Sunday  of  the  Resurrection,  (Easter.) 

Mon(ky,  6th  Week  in  Lent 

Golden  Friday. 

Monday  in  Albis,  (in  Whitsun  Week.) 
♦Commemoration  of  the  Martyrs.  ^ 
♦Lesson  for  the  Mart3nrs.\. 

Tuesday  in  Albis,  (in  Wnhs^m  Week.) 
♦For  the  Dead. 

For  the  Apostles. 

Wednesday  in  Albis,    Whitsun  Week?, 

Friday  of  Repose :  and,  of  Saints  in  Gen^ 

Thursday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 


Digitized  by 


Google 


48(» 


APPENDIX   L 


Lessons  fob  Public  Worship — Continued. 


ACTS. 


XVI. 

xvn. 

XVIIl. 
XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIU. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

XXVII. 

XXVIIL 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI 

XXXII. 
XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVIL 

xxxvm. 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

XLI. 

XLU. 
XLUI. 
XLIV. 

XLV. 
XLVI. 

XLVII. 

XLVIII. 

XLIX. 

L 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 


Chap,  uid  Ver. 


YlL  11-29. 

30-36. 

37-43. 

44-63. 

64-    I 

viii    3.     f 

8-13. 

14-26. 

26-40. 

ix.    1-21. 

22-36. 

36-43. 

X.    1-  8. 

d-24. 

26-33. 

2-18. 

19-30. 
xii.    1-24. 

26-  ) 
xiii.  12.     f 

13-26. 

26-43. 

44- 

XIV. 

7-19. 

20 

XV.    3. 

4-12 

13-22. 

23-33. 

36-41. 

xvi.    1-  7. 

8-16. 

16-36. 

36- 

xvii.  1 

2-14 

16-21. 

22-34. 

xviii.    1-11. 

12-28. 

xix.    1-12. 

13-22. 

23-29. 

30 

XX.    6. 

7-16. 


OCCABIOV& 


{  44-    ) 

i  XIV.    6.     ) 
7-19. 
(  20-    ) 

1    XV.    3.     S 


I    xvu.  1.     f 


\  30-    ) 

i    XX.    6.     f 


Slaughter  of  the  Children. 
Matins,  Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 
Saturday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.) 
For  Baptism  :  *and,  the  Mother  of  God. 

Commemoration  of  Stephen. 

Third  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Monday,  1st  Week  in  Lent. 

Benediction  of  Waters,  (on  Night  of  Epiphany:) 

And,  at  Baptism.    •  ^ 

Sunday  commencing  Lj&v/         I    /I    i  +'         ~^ 

Second  Sunday  in  LentT^^iW^  tf •wJMa%\  ; 

♦For  the  Dead.  ^ ^ 

Third  Sunday  in  Lent 

JThe  Apostles :  and.  Golden  Friday. 
Tuesday,  Isl  WCff*^    ^   ^ 

Wednesday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 

Thursday,  1st  Week  in  Lent 
Friday,  1st  Week  in  Lent 
Satuniay,  1st  Week  in  Lent 

Sunday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 

Monday  of  Passion  Week. 

Great  Sunday  of  the  Resurrection,  (Easter  Dty.) 

Tuesday  of  Passion  Week. 

Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

Monday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 

Vespers,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries 
Tuesday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 
Mid  Lent 

Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 
Friday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 
Saturday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 
Sunday,  6th  Week  in  Lent 

Sunday,  6th  Week  in  Lent 

Night  of  the  Crucifixion. 

4th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

6th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrectioj] 

Commemoration  of  the  Saints.  "^'^ 

6th  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Matins,  Pentecostal  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

First  Sunday  alter  Pentecost 

Second  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

♦For  the  Dead. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX    1. 


481 


LsssoNB  FOB  Public  Worship — Continued, 


ACTS. 


Lvm. 

LIX. 
LXI. 

Lxn. 
Lxm. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 
LXVI. 

Lxvn. 
Lxvm. 

LXIX. 


j    XX.  17-  ) 

\  xxi.  12.  S 

\      .  ^^-  \ 

{  xxu.  29.  f 

...  ^^-  [ 

<xxiii.  11.  ) 


Cbap.  and  Ver. 


12-36 

ixxiv.  1 
XXV.  12. 
13- 
XX vL  23. 
24- 
xxvii.  8. 

9-26 

27-44. 

xxviiL    1-10. 

11-22. 

23-31. 


<xxvL  23.     S 
i  24-    [ 

^xxvii.  8.     ) 


OOOASIONS. 


*For  the  Saints  and  Martyrs. 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Third  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
Mid-Day,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 
Seventh  Sunday  after  Pentecost 
Eighth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 
Ninth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 
Tenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 


ROMANS. 
L 

n. 


nr. 
rv, 

V, 
VL 

VIL 

vin. 

IX. 
X. 

XI. 

xn. 
xni. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

xvn. 
xvni. 

XIX. 
XX. 

XXI. 
XXII. 
XXIII. 


(    ill.  18.     \ 

I    .     ^^-    i 
i    iv.  12.     S 


VI. 

viL 


XI. 


xu. 
xiii. 


1-12. 
13-26. 
26-    ( 

1.     i 

2-13. 
14-27. 
28- 
18 
19- 
12. 
13-26 

1-11. 
12-21. 

1-23. 

1-26. 
26- 
11 

12-27. 
28- 

6. 

6-21 
22-29. 
30- 

4. 

6-21. 

1-12. 
13-36. 

1-21. 

1-10. 


\  viii.  11.     S 
12-27. 

Uiri 


Lesson  for  any  Day. 
Friday,  2d  Week  in  Lent 

Lesson  for  any  Day 

Friday,  3d  Week  in  Lent 
Any  Day. 

Any  Day. 

♦For  the  Martyr 

Any  Day. 

Monday  in  Albis,  (in  Whitsun  Week.) 

Saturday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 

Monday,  6th  Week  in  Lent :  and,  at  Baptism 

Tuesday  of  Passion  Week.  ^ 

Twilight,  great  Sunday  of  the  ftesurreotion. 

Tuesday,  6th  Week  in  Lent. 

♦Lesson  for  the  Martyrs.  ' 


Annunciation  to  2^h^rias.  ^ 

Lesson  for  Pilgrims.^-  i 

Entrance  of  our  Lord  into  the  Temple : 

And,  Commemoration  of  Prophets  and  Apostieft.- 

Middle  of  Pentecost.  / 

Tuesday  in  Passion  Week.,^' 

Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 

Monday,  1st  Week  in  Lent 

Time  when  the  Church  makes  an  Election. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


i82 


APPENDIX   1. 


Lb880N8  fob  Public  Wobship — Continued. 


ROMAN& 


Chap.  Md  Yar. 


OCCABIQIf& 


X3&V. 

XXV. 
XXVI. 

XX  vn. 


ziiLll-    ) 

xiv.  23.     ) 

XV.    1-18. 

14-38. 

xvi.    1-34. 


1  CORINTHIANS. 


in. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

vn. 
vm. 

IX 
X 
XI. 

xn. 
xin. 

XIV. 
XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

xvm. 

XIX. 

XX. 
XXI. 

xxn. 
xxni. 

XXIV. 
XXV. 
XXVL 

xxvn. 


1-17. 
18- 
ii.    4. 

10-16. 
iu.    1-16. 

16- 
iv.    6. 
6-16. 
17- 
V.    6. 

6-18 

vl    1-11 

12-20. 

vii.    1-24. 

26-40. 

viii.    1- 

ix.  12 

13-27. 
X.    1-13. 

14- 
xl22. 

23-34. 
xii.    1-27 
28-    j 
xiii.    3. 


U'Sri 

10-16. 
iii.    1-16. 

j    iv.    6.     } 
6-16. 


(  vui.    1-    ) 

1    ix.  12.     ] 

13-27. 

X.    1-13. 

\    XL  22.      [ 


Matins,  Sundiiy  commencing  Lent 

Tuesday,  1st  Week  in  Lent 
Second  Sunday  in  Lent 
♦For  the  Holy  Women. 


Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Matins,  Friday  of  the  CrucifixioiL 

First  Sunday  after  Pentecost 
Second  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Third  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
Sixth  Sunday  aft^r  Pentecost 
Thursday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 
Wednesday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 
For  the  holy  ^"'•^y*^ 

For  any  Day. 

^Commemoration  of  Anthony  and  his  Companions. 
Oblation,  on  Epiphany  Day. 

Matins,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 

Oblation,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries. 
Sunday  of  Pentecost,  (Whitsunday.) 

The  Apostles. 


I 
'  xiv, 


19 

20-33. 
34-40. 
1-19. 
20-33, 
34-68. 
xvi.  1-12. 
13-24. 


XV. 


8  CORINTHIANS. 


L 
IL 

in. 

IV. 
V. 


1-  7. 

8-22. 

23- 

ii.  11 

12- 
iii.    3. 
4-18. 


i      ...    ^2-      I 

i    iii.    3.     ) 


The  Washing. 

The^Genuflectioq^,^ 

Seventh  Ji^unday  after  Pentecost 

Matins,  Resurrection  (Easter)  Day. 

Oblation,  Resurrection  (Easter)  Day 

For  the  Dead. 

Fifth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Tuesday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 

Matins,  Saturday  of  Annunciation. 
Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Thursday,  4th  Week  in  Lent 

♦Consecration  of  the  ChrisnL 
♦Basil  and  his  Associates. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX   I. 


483 


Lessons  fob  Public  Wobship — Continued. 


8  00RI1ITHIAN& 

fiioiii.      Cha|>.  and  Ver. 

VI. 

iv.    1-  6. 

vn. 

7-18. 

VIIL 

V.    1-10. 

IX. 

11-19. 

X. 

20- 

vi.  10. 

(         11- 

}  vil    8. 

XL 

xn. 

4-16. 

xin. 

viil    1-  8. 

XIV. 

9-24. 

XV. 

ix.    1-16. 

XVL 

X.    1-18. 

xva 

xL    1-16. 

XVUL 

(         16-    ) 
xiLl8.     \ 

XIX. 

1»- 
)  ziiL  13.    f 

GALi 

mANS. 

L 

i.    1-10. 

n. 

11-24. 

IIL 

a.  1-10. 

IV. 

11-16. 

V. 

(  17-m.l4.| 
i        16-29.  J 

VL 

iv.    1-18. 

VIL 

19-27. 

VllL 

4         28- 
J     V.  12. 

IX. 

{         13- 

}    vi.    6. 

X. 

7-18. 

BPH] 

BBIANS. 

L 

I     1-14. 

n. 

'j     iL    3.     } 

OL 

4-18. 

IV. 

i          19-    ) 
i    iii.  12. 

V. 

13-21. 

VL 

iv     1-16. 

vn. 

17-24. 

vm. 

J          26-    ) 
(      V.    2.     ) 

IX. 

3-21. 

X. 

j          22- 
\    vl     9. 

XL 

10-20. 

O00A8IQNS. 


Third  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
♦The  Martyrs.-^  -  - 

♦The  Deai 

New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Sunday  commencing  Lent :  and,  Supplications,  (Fast  of 
the  Ninevites.)  • 

Friday,  Ist  Week  in  Lent 

Any  Day. 

Any  Day. 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Mid-Lent 

Sixth  Sunday  in  Lent 

Monday,  4th  Week  in  Lent. 

Commemoration  of  Paul. 
Friday  of  Mid-Lent 


For  any  Day. 

For  Stephen. 
♦For  the  Patriarchs. 

For  any  Day. 
♦The  AdoratioiLof  the  Cross.  ^       ' 
♦The'"ArinuricIation  of  the  Mother  of  God*. 

Oblation,  on  the  Nativity,  (Christmas.) 

The  Nativity  of  John. 

The  Circumcision  of  our  Lord. 

The  3d  Sunday  in  Lent 

Matins,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

For  Baptisms. 

After  the  Resurrection,  (on  ESaster  Day.; 

Thursday  of  Repose. 

Thursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

♦Elevation  of  the  Cross. 
Ascension  of  our  Lord. 
New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 

Friday  of  Repose. 

Seventh  Sunday  after  Epiphany 

For  any  Day. 

♦The  Tonsure  of  Monks. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


•^4: 


APPENDIX    1. 


Lb88on8  for  Public  Worship — ContinueiL 


PHILIPP1AN& 

O00A8I(»r& 

LtnoBS* 

Cbap.  uid  Ver. 

L 

11. 

IIL 

IV. 

V. 

VL 

VIL 

L     1-11. 

12-20. 

U.     1-11. 

12-30. 

ill     1-12. 

i      •    18-    > 

1     iv.    7.     f 

8-23. 

For  any  Day. 

Commemoration  of  Peter  and  PauL 

Twilight,  Wednesday  of  Passion  Week. 

For  any  Day. 

For  any  Day. 

For  any  Day. 

For  any  Day. 

00L088IAMS. 


I. 
(I. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 


6-15. 

16-23. 

iii.    1-17. 

i    iv.  18.     f 


1  THE88ALONIANS. 
II, 


III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 


)  ii":i2r  ( 

13-16 

\    ...   ^^-    I 
i    iil  13.     f 

iv.    1-  12. 

)  ..1?: ! 


For  any  Day/ 

4th  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Thursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Mid-Day,  Friday  of  the  CrucifizioiL 

For  any  Day. 

Wednesday  of  the  Week  of  Repose. 

FoTanyDay. 


For  any  Day. 

Twilight,  Saturday  of  the  Annanoiation. 
For  any  Day. 
For  Baptism. 
♦For  the  Dead. 
Fourth  Sunday  in  Lent 


i  THESSALONIANa 


H]    iii!  19!     V    '^^^^^  ^^  Epiphany. 


ITIMOTHT. 

L 
XL 

m. 

IV 

V. 
VL 

2TIM0TUY 

i. 
il 


^f 


Friday,  5th  Week  in  Lent. 

For  Supplications,  (Fast  of  the  Ninevites.) 

Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany 

Thursday  after  the  Resurrection. 

Fifth  Sunday  in  I^ent 

Fifth  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 


J"    l|*Commemoration  of  Ignatius  and  Companions. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX    1. 


486 


Lbbsonb  fob  Public  Wobship — Contimied. 


8  TIMOTHY. 

OCCASIONS. 

LeMoni.    1  Chap,  and  Ver. 

n. 
m. 

IV. 
V. 

i     il    4-    ) 

^    iu.    9.     i 

10-16. 

}    iv.    8.     \ 
9-22. 

♦Commemoration  of  Peter  of  Alexandria. 
♦Commemoration  of  our  Lord  SevguuL— • 
*0n  the  death  of  a  Bishop. 
♦Commemoration  of  Gregory. 

IL 


J     ii.  10.     \ 
\    iii.  16.     \ 


On  making  a  Pres  byter. 

At  Baptism :  also,  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 


PHILEMON. 
L|  1-26.|  For  any  Day. 


HEBREWS. 


L 
D. 

m. 

TV. 

V. 

VI. 
VIL 

vm. 

IX. 

X. 

XL 

xn. 
xin. 

XIV. 
XV. 
XVI 

xvn. 
xvni. 

XIX. 
XX. 

XXL 

XXIL 


I  i  i\ 

j    iv.Jt    I 

i  -It:  f 

J    vi.  20.     S 


VI. 

vii. 


1- 

4. 

6-13. 
14- 
13. 
14- 
13. 
14- 
11 
12 
20. 

1-17. 
18-28. 

1 
10. 

11-16. 
16-28. 

1-14. 
16-26. 
26-38. 

7. 

8-22. 
23-31. 
32- 

2 

3-11. 
12-27 
28- 

8. 

9-26. 


j  viii.    1-    ) 
i    ix.  10.     f 


)    xi    7.     } 

8-22. 

23-31. 

(  xii.    2.      \ 

3-11. 

12-27. 

\  x«ii.    8.     ( 


Twilight  and  Matins,  on  the  Nativity. 
First  Station,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 
♦For  the  Mother  of  God. 

Saturday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.)      * 


.^>' 


i^  '^- 


Second  Station,  Friday  Night  of  the  Crucifizion. 

Second  Night  in  Passion  Week. 

♦For  the  Mother  of  God. 

Tuesday  in  Albis,  (Whitsun  Week.)       •- 
"The  Nativity :  and. 

The  Consecration  of  the  Church,  or  of  an  Altar. 

Third  Station,  Friday  Night  of  the  Crucifixion. 

Twilight,  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries.         ^ 

Tliird  Sunday  after  the  Resurrection. 
♦Night  of  Blessing  Water. 

For  Baptism. 

Matins,  Monday  in  Passion  Week.  « 

Twilight,  Tuesday  in  Passion  Weekr 
Slaughter  of  the  Infants. 

The  Prophets,  Apostles,  ♦and  Patria^chs.^ 

«  When  there  is  Wrath,"  (Time  of  Calamity.)- 

Oblation  of  the  Forty  [Martyrs.] 
*The  318  Fathers,  (Council  of  Nice :)  ^  ^ 

*Also,  Commemoration  of  believing  Kings. 

Ninth  Hour,  Friday  of  the  Crucifixion. 


'^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


486 


APPENDIX   1 


Lbssons  fob  Pubuo  Worship — OondnmtL 


JAME& 


LeiMont.      Chap,  and  Ver. 


I. 

IL 

III. 

IV. 

V. 
VI. 


L    1-21. 

22-  ) 
ii.  13.     f 

14-26 
iii.  1-  J 
iv.    6.     j 

V.    6.     j 
7-20. 


1  PETER. 


I. 
II. 

m. 

IV. 

V. 
VI. 

vu. 


i.    1-25 

ii.    1-10. 

11-    ) 

iiL    6.     J 

7-15 

16-    ) 

iv.    6.     S 

7-19. 

V.    1-14. 


I 
II. 


j     ii!    8?    ( 
(    iii.  18.     [ 


1  JOHK. 


IL 

HL 
IV. 
V. 

VI. 


)  ill  Jr  ( 


2-2' 
iv.    1-10 
11-21. 


V.    1-21. 


SJOHN. 

I.| 


SJOHN. 

LI 


JUDE. 

LI 


1-13. 


1-15. 


1-25. 


OOOAttOiraL 


CommemoratioQ  of  the  Martyra. 
Second  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Eleventh  Sunday  after  Pentecost 
Third  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

Twelfth  Sunday  after  Pentecost 

Fourth  Sunday  after  Epiphany.       LajL^ 

New  Sunday,  (Whitsunday.) 
Fifth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 

John  the  Baptist 

Sixth  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Thirteenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost . 
And,  at  Consecration  of  Bishops:'     ^ 
Seventh  Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
Fourteenth  Sunday  after  Pentecost. 


Lesson  for  Mount  Tabor. 
Great  Feast  of  Ascension. 


\ 


l4,*The 
O.TTatn 


First  Sunday  after  the  Nativity. 

Oblation,  Hosanna  (Palm)  Sunday. 

♦The  Mother  of  God.        ^ 
Nativity  ot  6Ur  tSrcT  ^ 
The  mystical  Washing :  and, 
Sunday  after  Epiphany. 
The  F^ast  of  Dghts,  (Epiphany.) 

Entrance  of  our  Lord  into  the  Temple 


Wednesday,  2d  Week  in  Lept :  and, 
Wednesday  in  Passion  Weelc. 


♦Anthony  and  his  Oompamons : 
Tuesday  in  Passion  Week : 
Also,  the  Prophets.  ^ 


^}5  ^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  I.  487 


The  Apocalypse  is  not  divided  into  Lessons,  nor  is  it,  in  the  London 
editions,  broken  into  Paragraphs,  but  is  printed  in  one  solid  mass.  Yet  it 
has  the  Chapters  and  Verses  noted  in  the  margin,  like  the  other  Books, 
here  following  the  London  Polyglott. 

The  Four  Gospels  contain  248  Lessons,  of  which  7  are  unappropriated, 
or  serve  for  any  day,  and  the  remaining  241  serve  for  652  different  occa- 
sions. JyThQ  Acts  and  the  Epistles  (which  are  collectively  called  the 
Apostles)  contain  242  Lessons,  of  which  20  are  unappropriated,  and  the 
remaining  222  serve  241  occasions^  On  most  of  the  occasions,  there  was 
one  Lesson  appointed  from  the  Gospels,  arid  one  also  from  the  Apostles. 

This  Table  designates  the  Lessons  for  forty  successive  Sundays,  from 
the  Sunday  before  the  Nativity  onward  to  the  i4thittunaa^aite^Pente- 
cost.  The  remaining  twelve  Sundays  appear  not  tohaveTSeeiTalways 
designated  in  the  same  manner  by  the  Syrian  Christians,  and  therefore, 
they  are  not  provided  for  in  the  London  editions,  which  we  follow.' 
Assemani  tells  us,  (Biblioth.  Orient.  Clem.  Vat.  tom.  i.  p.  530,  note,)  that 
the  Chaldean  Christians  denominate  the  four  Sundays  next  before  Christ- 
mas, Advent  (Anundationis)  Sundays,  and  the  four  preceding  them,  Sundays 
of  the  Consecration  of  the  Church,  ll  Other  Syrian  Christians  designated  the 
Sundays  in  the  latter  part  of  the  ecclesiastical  year,  by  the  Gospels  that 
were  read. 

Tie  Sundays  mentioned  in  this  Table,  derive  their  names  from  the  two 
immovable  Festivals,  the  Nativity,  (1^^,  Christmas,  December  25th,)  and 
Epiphany,  (l>^?»  January  6th ;)  and  from  the  movable  Feasts  dependent 
on  the  day  of  our  Lord's  Resurrection,  (IALOa^,)  that  is,  Easter  Sunday. 
From  the  Nativity  are  named  the  Sundays  before,  and  the  Sunday  after 
Christmas.  From  Epiphany  are  named  the  seven  Sundays  after  Epiph- 
any, if  there  should  be  so  many  before  Lent  commences. /^e  Sundays 
in  Lent  (IS^OO^,  the  Fast)  are  numbered  1st  to  the  6th  H  Lent.  Then 
follows  Hosanna  {Hallelujah,  or  Palm)  Sunday,  which  is  the  Sunday 
before  Easter.  The  week  before  Eiaster  is  called  Passion  Week,  being  the 
week  on  which  our  Lord  was  crucified.  The  Thursday  of  that  week  was 
called  Thursday  of  the  Mysteries,  because  on  that  day  Christ  instituted 
the  Holy  Supper.  The  Friday  of  that  week  was  called  Friday  of  the 
Crucifixion.  The  Sunday  following  was  the  great  Sunday  of  our  Lord's 
Resurrection,  (lASniO,)  or  Easter  Day,  The  five  next  succeeding  Sun- 
days were  called  the  second  to  the  sixth  after  the  Resurrection ;  after  which 
oame  the  Sunday  of  Pentecost,  (.*  f^rcsr^r^^K^t?^>^  called  also  New  Sunday, 
and  Sunday  in  White,  (in  Albis,)  Wl^SSw^day  ;  and  the  succeeding  week 


/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


488  APPENDIX    1. 


was  called   the    Week  in    WTiite,   (in  Albis,)  Whitsun-Week.    This  was 
followed  by  fourteen  Sundays,  named  the  Jlrsty  second,  &o.,  after  Pentecost 

Besides  the  forty  Sundays  provided  for  as  above,  this  Table  assigns 
particular  Lessons  for  the  Nativity  of  our  Lord,  or  Christmas  Day ;  for 
Epiphany,  and  the  annual  Consecration  of  Water  on  that  Festival ;  for 
daily  public  worship  during  the  six  weeks  of  Lent,  and  the  week  before 
Easter,  or  Passion  Week ;  also  for  the  annual  Consecration  of  the  Chrism 
on  Thursday  of  Passion  Week  and  for  daily  worship  throughout  the  week 
in  Albis,  or  Whitsun-Week.  IfThe  otiier  appropriations  are  for  Saints' 
Days,  commemoration  of  Martyrs,  Ordinations,  Baptisms,  &c. 


NOTE  TO  THE  SIXTH  EDITION. 

Besides  the  Lessons,  Manuscripts  have  a  division  into  larger  Sections  'whichcan 
be  seen  noted  in  the  Oroomia  New  Testament  of  1846;  with  often  the  Eusebian 
Canon  sections,  and  still  other  minor  divisions  of  no  moment  to  the  western 
church.    These  divisions  all  vary  slightly  in  the  manuscripts. 

Besides  a  few  inaccuracies  in  the  preceding  table,  which  more  recent  informa- 
tion enables  us  to  correct,  the  following  matters  may  properly  be  noted. 

The  word  translated  "  Lent "  by  Dr.  Murdock  means  "  The  Fast ;  or,  when 
the  phrase  is  written  in  full,  "The  Great  Fflst."  *^  MvstPrJps  ^' aj]^ '*nKio»i^»" 
m^^p  the  "Communion/'  or  TheJ^ord's  Supper,  u"  Tabernacles "  is  not  the  Jew- 
ish feast,  butJthe  "  Transfiguration."  "  Mount  Tabor  "  is  another  name  for  the 
same  feast. /iFor  "  Mother  of  God,"  two  phrases  occur;  one  of  the  same  literal 
meaning ;  tne  other  answering  exactly  to  the  Latin  "  Deipara"  but  really  trans- 
lated from  the  Greek  "  Theotokos.'*  "  Our  Lord's  entrance  into  the  Temple  "  is 
the  "  Presentation"  of  him  as  an  infant.  "The  Holy  Women  "  would  in  western 
parlance  be  "  Female  Samts  "  (T^ie  "  Lesson  of  the  Sinning  Woman  ;*'  John  vii. 
53 — viii.  11,  is  unknown  to  the  Syrian  church.  It  was  add«d  in  Walton's  Poly- 
glott,  and  thence  mserted  in  the  English  Syriac  Testament^  "  Golden  Friday  " 
receives  its  name  from  the  lesson  read.|f^Twilight "  means^daga-^*'  ttP^^^Hy  '^  -If 

JThe  scheme  o|  lessons  here  given  is,  in  prpnpFal,  Thaj;  nl   iCf^fj^ni^g.     Thoae  of  \  i       -i^ 
the  Nestonans,  of  the  Chaldeans  (papal  Syrians),  an3' of  the  Mettiles  (S:^^n  W^ 
Greek  church),  have  very  trifling  variations,  especially  in  the  saints'  days.     i.  h.  h. 


-"V-v.^r: 


v-> 


Ja^cr^K/^^ 


/\ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  II. 

THE  SYRUC  TRANSLATIONS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 


BY  ISAAC  H.  HALL. 


At  the  time  when  Dr.  Murdock  wrote,  much  less  was  known  of  the  Syr- 
ian versions  than  now.  The  Curetonian  version  had  not  been  discovered ; 
the  existence  of  a  translation  ofEphrem^s  Commentary  on  Tatian*s  Diates- 
saron  was  scarcely  suspected,  although Jhenin^print  in  Armenian;  the  true 
character  of  the  so-called  Karkaphensian  version  was  misunderstood;  a 
great  body  of  Syriac  literature  since  printed  was  then  undiscovered  or  inac- 
cessible ;  and  great  numbers  of  Syriac  manuscripts,  both  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment and  other  writings,  had  not  yet  come  to  light. 

Inconsequence,  Dr.  Murdock's  ** Appendix  II.,''  though  well  up  to  his 
times,  and  replete  with  both  learning  and  evidence  of  diligent  research, 
has  been  largely  superseded,  and  partially  contradicted,  by  later  labors  and 
investigations;  and  it  has  seemed  no  more  than  just  to  his  advanced  and 
careful  erudition,  to  substitute  in  this  edition  anew  **  Appendix  II.,"  which 
should  embody  what  Dr.  Murdock  would  not  have  failed  to  supply,  were 
he  still  living  and  laboring  among  us. 

There  are  now  known,  besides  a  few  minor  f ragmen ts,^^jy^rincipal  Syri- 
ac versions  of  the  New  Testament:  the  Curetcnian,  the  Peshitto,  the  Phi- 
loxeiiian,  the  Harclensian  (Harclean  or  Heraclean),  and  the  Jerusalem  or 
Hierosolymitan  versions;  and  also  two  principal  Syriac  versions  of  the  Old 
Testament:  the  Peshitto,  and  the  Svrian  Hexaplar.  Of  these  versions  it  is 
proposed  to  give  a  rather  full  account  of  the  Peshitto ;  and  then  to  treat 
more  summarily  of  the  others. 

THE  PESHITTO  SYRIAC  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

This  is,  beyond  a  doubt,  the  oldest  of  all  except  the  Curetonian  unless  it 
should  be  proved,  as  some  maintain,  that  the  Diatessaron  of  Tatian  is  also 
earlier.  Most  scholars  consider  the  Peshitto  younger  thun  the  Curetonian 
because,  (1.)  from  a  comparison  of  the  two  the  Peshitto  appears  to  be  large- 
ly a  revision  of  the  other,  or  of  similar  matter,  and  generally  an  improve- 
ment. (2.)  From  a  much  larger  and  more  complicated  view,  which  embraces 
the  entire  textual  criticism  of  the  Greek  New  Testament,"  the  Curetonian 
appears  undeniably  the  older.  If  the  views  respecting  the  New  Testament 
text  entertained  by  such  critics  as  Tregelles,  Tischendorf,  Westcott  and 
Hort,  the  English  and  American  Revisers  of  1881,  and  most  of  the  devout 

[489] 


Digitized  by 


Google 


490  APPENDIX  IL 

and  better  scholars  of  the  present  day,  are  correct  in  general,  there  can  be 
no  question  that  the  Peshitto  is  the  revision  of  an  earlier  version  or  versions, 
and  later  than  the  Curetonian.  (8.)  The  character  of  New  Testament  quo- 
tations in  the  earlj  Syrian  writers,  especially  those  who  appear  not  to  have 
known  Greek,  tend  to  show  that  there  were  other  early  and  less  finished 
versions.  However,  there  are  a  few  scholars  who  maintain  the  contrary 
view;  though  their  arguments  lie  entirely  outside  of  the  Syriac  language, 
and  depend  solely  upon  their  supposition  that  the  so-called  Greek  textus  re. 
eeptus  is  more  ancient  than  that  which  scholars  generally  receive  as  proved 
overwhelmingly  to  be  the  most  ancient. 

The  Peshitto  is  not — nor  is  any  Syriac  version  that  we  know — older  than, 
or  independent  of,  the  Greek.  All  the  Syriac  versions  bear  the  clearest  and 
most  unmistakable  proofs  of  translation  from  the  Greek,  and  not  tiee  versa. 
The  presumption,  fondly  indulged  during  times  of  less  knowledge,  that, 
since  Syriac  was  nearly  the  native  tongue  of  our  Lord,  therefore  the  four 
Gospels  which  we  have  were  first  wrlttenrin  tliat "language,  is  found  to  be 
contrary  to  the  facts  of  the  case,  and  is  no  longer  entertained  by  any  one 
conversant  with  the  subject. 

Exactly  how  old  the  Peshitto  is,  no  one  can  now  tell.  We  trace  it  back 
to  the  fourth  century,  where  we  find  it  quoted  by  Ephrem ;  but  beyond  that 
we  can  only  conjecture.  But  it  has  been  the  current  and  common  version 
of  the  Syrians,  from  that  time  till  the  present;  and  our  extant  m^nn^wrip^ 
go  back  as  earlLaa,^.  0^464. 

5e  name  Peshitto,  hoWever,  is  not  so  ancient.  We  cannot  trace  this 
back  further  than  the  seventh  century,  when  the  Philoxenian  and  the  Har- 
clensian  became  current ;  when  the  name  seems  to  have  arisen  for  the  sake 
of  distinguishing  it  from  those  versions,  especially  the  latter,  which  was  but 
a  revision  of  the  other.  The  word  ** Peshitto"  is  a  feminine  adjective, 
meaning  "  Simple ;"  the  full  phrase  used  meaning  **the  simple  version." 
Many  reasons  have  been  conjectured  to  account  for  the  adoption  of  that 
name ;  but  the  most  probable  supposition  seems  to  be  the  following ;  the 
text  of  the  Harclensian — like  the  Old  Testament  Hexaplar— was  interspersed 
with  obeli  and  asterisks,  with  other  marks,  while  the  margins  also  were  of- 
ten occupied  with  various  readings  in  Greek ;  the  design  of  the  whole  being 
text-critical^  or  to  mark  passages  where  testimonies  varied  respecting  the 
text,  or  reading.  But  the  Peshitto  copies  were  free  from  all  this  apparatus, 
or  **  Simple."  The  name  never  could  have  meant  **for  simple  people,'* 
although  the  Harclensian,  in  contrast,  was  intended  for,  and  was  most  prof- 
itably used  by  scholars ;  nor  could  it  well  have  referred  to  the  style  of  trans- 
lation. It  was  *'  the  clear  text"  edition,  and  **  Simple  "  in  that  sense.  But 
however  the  name  may  have  arisen,  the  fact  is  that  it  has  been  the  common, 
as  well  as  the  most  highly  esteemed  version,  used  alike  by  all  the  Syrian 
churches,  without  exception — Jacobites,  Nestorians,  Maronites,  Chaldeans, 
Melkites,  and  the  St.  Thomas  Christians  of  Malabar;  the  only  permanent 
variations  in  the  copies  used  by  different  sects  or  peoples  being  almost  en- 
tirely certain  local  differences  in  pronunciation  orvoweling, — which  formed 
no  part  of  the  original  text. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  II.  491 

The  character  of  the  version  is  masterly ;  such,  indeed,  as  would  seem 
impossible  to  be  the  first  effort  of  a  translator.  It  ranks  in  merit  with  our 
English  version,  or  with  the  German  of  Luther,  for  happy,  close,  and  idio- 
matic rendering;  and,  so  far  from  being  inferior  to  these  as  aversion,  it  has 
the  advantage  of  being  in  a  language  native  to  Bible  countries  and  reaching 
back  to  Bible  times,  and  thus  possessing  ability  to  present  with  perfect  ex- 
actness many  ideas  which  our  western  tongiies  can  only  express  by  para- 
phrase or  parallel.  But  the  Peshitto  abounds  in  free  renderings,  and  does 
not  shun  paraphrase  in  proper  case.  It  is  faithful  to  the  sense,  but  not  slav- 
ish to  the  letter. 

The  Peshitto  embraces  all  the  canonical  books  of  the  New  Testament  ex- 
cept the  Second  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  Second  and  Third  of  John,  the  Epistle 
of  Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse.  These  books,  as  seen  in  our  ordinary  Syriac 
New  Testaments,  are  no  part  of  the  Peshitto,  but,  except  the  Apocalypse, 
belong  to  the  Philoxenian  version.  Just  what  is  the  origin  of  the  Apoca- 
lypse of  the  printed  Syriac,  is  still  doubtful.  It  is  extant  in  but  few  manu- 
~scripts,  and  seems  allied  to  the  Harclensian;  but  not  enough  data  are  yeraf 
hand  to  make  its  age  of  Birthplace  certain.  ~ 

The  fact'tEaf  these  books  ard  miSSlflgln  the  Peshitto  has  often  been  used, 
by  those,  especially,  who  have  claimed  an  apostolic  or  sub-apostolic  origin 
of  the  Peshitto,  as  an  argument  for  its  extreme  antiquity ;  as  if  it  **  included 
all  the  books  universally  admitted  to  be  genuine  in  the  early  ages  of  the 
church,  and  excluded  all  but  one  of  the  books  concerning  which  there  was  for 
a  time  doubt  and  uncertainty. ''  But  that  argument  makes  directly  against  its 
apostolic  or  sub-apostolic  origin ;  for  if  such  were  its  origin,  its  canon  would 
be  complete,  and  independent  of  any  doubts  on  the  part  of  various  churches. 
Moreover,  recent  investigation  tends  more  and  more  to  establish  the  fact  of 
the  very  early  general  reception  of  these  books,  especially  the  Apocalypse ; 
except  that  the  testimony  is  mostly  secondary  in  respect  to  the  Second  Epis- 
tle of  Peter.  The  exclusion  of  these  books  points  rather  to  a  time  near  the 
beginning  of  the  fourth  century,  and  to  a  humoring  of  doubts  apparently 
somewhat  in  fashion  towards  the  times  of  Eusebius.  That  Ephrem,  who 
_seems  not  to  have  known  Greek,  knew  of  the  existence  of  the  Apocalypse," 
is  certairiT'Ohce,  "alTeast,  "(Homily  on  Psalm,  141  (140):  3),  he  has  a  clear 
allusion  to  Rev.  v.  1,  mentioning  the  book  by  name  as  *'The  Revelation  of 
John,  a  great  and  wonderful  book."  Yet  Ephrem^  while  using  the  Pes(h- 
itto  freely,  seems  not  infrequently  to  cite  Scripture  from  a  different  source, 
and  with  readings  differing  from  the  Peshitto.  Sometimes  he^  agrees jwith, 
Jbhg  Curetoniao^  against  the  P^shitto^  It  is  certain  that  EpBrem  either  had 
"  access  to  a  complete  canonical  New  Testament,  or  else  to  a  collection  of 
excerpts  from  all  the  canonical  books.  The  writings  published  under  his 
name  in  the  Roman  edition  contain  allusions  to,  if  not  citations  from,  all 
the  books  omitted  from  the  Peshitto;  but  some  of  these  citations  from/ 
the  Apocalypse  occur  in  works  known  to  be  wrongly  attributed  to  him,  I 
and  belonging  really  to  James  of  Edessa,  who  lived  three  centuries  later.    { 

Aphraates,_ ** the  Persian  sage,"  who  probably  flourished  about  the 
middle" of  the  fourth  century,  whose  homilies  are  crowded  with  Scripture 


Digitized  by 


Google 


492  APPENDIX  II. 

citations  and  allusions,  also  had  texts  different  from  the  Peshitto.     It  is 
claimed  by  some  that  all  his  gospel  quotations  .were  taken  from  Tatian's 
Diatessaron,   but  this  lacks  proof.     His  citations  often  agree  with   the 
s^    Cu];fitgaiftP  againgt  the  PesWtto. 

In  the  light  of  to-3ay  it  seems  hopeless  to  seek  to  identify  the  authors, 
or  rather,  the  revisers,  who  constructed  this  version.  Evidently  it  was  the 
result  of  growth.  With  respect  to  the  place  where  it  was  made,  opin- 
ions— which  in  this  matter  are  conjectures  merely— have  varied.  So  long 
as  the  version  was  supposed  to  be  apostolic,  or  sub-apostolic,  the  most 
natural  guess  for  Europeans  was  Antioch.     But  that  opinion  was  not  held 

I  in  Asia.  Michaelis,  on  the  other  hand,  supposed  Edessa  to  be  the  place  of 
its  origin,  since  Edessa  was  the  metropolis  of  the  eastern  world,  and  the 
I  centre  of  a  region  where  Christianity  was  planted  very  early.  In  his  favor 
I  are  not  only  these  facts,  but  the  further  facts  that  the  language  of  Edessa 
I  was  the  recognized  classical  Syriac,  that  a  brilliant  succession  of  writers 
i there  kept  its  character  as  such  for  ages;  and  that  the  Peshitto  ranks  high, 
jif  not  at  the  head,  among  the  classical  models.  On  the  whole,  this  is  as 
'reasonable  a  conjecture  as  can  be  framed;  and  it  has  stronger  support  at  the 
•  present  time  than  when  Michaelis  first  made  it. 

THE  VALUE  OF  THE  PESHITTO  VERSION. 

The  great  value  of  this  translation  depends  on  its  high  antiquity,  on  the 
competence  and  fidelity  of  the  translators,  and  on  the  near  affinity  of  its 
language  to  that  spoken  by  our  Lord  and  his  Apostles.  In  all  these  re- 
spects it  stands  pre-eminent  among  the  numerous  versions  of  the  New 
Testament. 

On  this  subject  the  learned  men  who  have  devoted  particular  attention 
to  this  unrivalled  version,  are  in  full  accord.  The  older  writers,  besides 
its  merits  as  a  version,  believed  in  its  apostolic  origin,  and  considered  it  as 
authoritative  where  interpretations  differed.  But  from  the  more  moderate 
and  correct  utterances  we  may  cite  the  following: 

Brian  Walton,  in  the  Prolegomena  to  his  Biblia  Polyglotta  (p.  92), 

says:  '*The  Syriac  version  of  the  New  Testament  exhibits  the  native  aspect, 

(faciem  nativam,)  of  the  original  text,  and  confirms  its  integrity.     For  it 

follows  the  Greek  text  for  the  most  part,  xardi  7r6da^  strictly.    For,  the 

^Jie)vJTestamjnt_bein^wntte^^^      .Clreekj  by  men  whose  vernacular  lanffliftgft 

was  Syriac,  everywhere  savors  of   Syriasms.     Hence,  Ludovicus  de  Dieu 

(in  his  Harinonia  trium  Linguarum)  affirms,  that  the  true  import  of  the 
phraseology  of  the  New  Testament  can  scarcely  be  learned,  except  from 
the  Syriac.  For  no  one  will  say  that  the  phraseology  of  the  Evangelists 
and  Apostles  is  pure  Greek :  and  it  would  be  easier  for  Europeans  to  imi- 
tate the  elegance  of  Plato  and  Aristotle,  than  for  Plato  and  Aristotle  to 
explain  to  us  the  New  Testament,  because  the  holy  men  conceived  in  Syriac 
that  which  they  wrote  in  Greek,  injecting  the  force  of  their  vernacular 
tongue  into  foreign  words."  After  accounting  for  some  diversity  in  the 
orthography  of  certain  Syriac  words,  such  as  Golgotha,  Aceldama,  Mam- 
mona,  &c.,  in  the  Greek  and  Syriac  New  Testaments,  by  saying,  that  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  n.  49S 

Peshitto  of  both  Testaments  is  written  in  the  Antiochian  dialect,  and  not  in 
the  dialect  of  Jerusalem,  he  concludes  thus:  ^^From  these  most  ancient 
versions  we  infer,  that  this  (the  Syriac)  language  is  of  the  highest  impor- 
tance, because  the  writers  of  the  New  Testament,  to  whom  this  language 
was  vernacular,  first  preached  the  divine  oracles  in  it  to  the  Jews,  and  to 
the  nations  around  them,  and  afterwards  wrote  them  out  in  Greek,  yet 
retaining  everywhere  the  spirit  (gustum)  of  the  Syriac.  Nay,  it  was  ver- 
nacular to  the  Lord  and  Saviour  himself;  he  drew  it  in  with  his  mother's 
milk:  and  in  it  the  only  begotten  Son  of  God  revealed  to  the  world  the 
will  of  God,  and  the  express  promises  of  eternal  life.  This  language  He 
consecrated  by  his  holy  lips ;  in  this  language  He  taught  the  doctrines  of 
the  Gospel ;  in  it  He  offered  his  prayers  to  the  Father,  laid  open  the  mys- 
teries hidden  from  the  world,  and  heard  the  voice  of  the  Father  coming 
from  heaven :  so  that  we  may  say, 

*  Lingua  hominuin  est  lingua  nobilitata  DeL' 
And,  as  a  poet  has  said  of  a  Syrian  lexicographer, 

*  No8  docet  hio  unus,  Numinis  ore  loquL' 

Moreover,  this  is  the  language  of  the  Christian  doctors  through  nearly  all 
the  East,  as  appears  from  the  Liturgies  and  Divine  Officies  almost  every- 
where performed  in  it." 

John  D.  Michaelis,  in  his  Litrod.  to  the  New  Testament,  (translation 
of  Marsh,  ed.  London,  1802,  vol.  ii.  P.  L  p.  40,  &c.,)  says:  **The 
Peschito  is  the  very  best  translation  of  the  Greek  Testament  that  I  have 
.ever  read:  that  of  Luther  ....  holding  the  second  rank.  Of  all  the 
Syriac  authors  with  which  I  am  acquainted,  not  excepting  Ephraim  and 
Bar-Hebraeus,  its  language  is  the  most  elegant  and  pure ;  not  loaded  with 
foreign  words,  like  the  Philoxenian  version  and  other  later  writings,  and 
discovers  the  hand  of  a  master  in  rendering  those  passages  where  the  two 
idioms  deviate  from  each  other.  It  has  no  marks  of  the  stiffness  of  a 
translation,  but  is  written  with  the  ease  and  fluency  of  an  original :  and  this 
excellence  of  its  style  must  be  ascribed  to  its  antiquity,  and  to  its  being 
wiitten  in  a  city  that  was  the  residence  of  Syrian  kings.  ...  It  is  true  that 
the  Syriac  version,  like  all  human  productions,  is  not  destitute  of  faults, 
and  (what  is  not  to  be  regarded  as  a  blemish)  differs  frequently  from  the 
modern  mode  of  expl  ination.  But  I  know  of  none  that  is  so  free  from 
error,  and  none  that  I  consult  with  so  much  confidence,  in  case  of  diffi- 
culty and  doubt.  I  have  never  met  with  a  single  instance  where  the  Greek 
is  so  interpreted,  as  to  betray  any  weakness  or  ignorance  in  the  translator: 
and  though  in  many  other  translations,  the  original  is  rendered  in  so 
extraordinary  a  manner  as  almost  to  excite  a  smile,  the  Syriac  version  must 

. ?ver  be  read  with  profound  veneration.".  .  .  *'The  affinity  of  the  Syriac 

to  the  dialect  of  Palestine,  is  so  ofreat  as  to  justify  in  some  respects,  the 
assertion  that  the  Syriac  translator  has  recorded  the  actions  and  speeches  of 
Christ  in  the  very  language  in  which  he  spoke.  .  .  .  The  difference  between 
the  dialect  which  was  spoken  by  Christ,  and  that  of  the  Syriac  translator, 
consisted  almost  wholly  in  the  mode  of  pronouncing;  and  if  a  proper  use 


Digitized  by 


Google 


404  APPENDIX  U. 

had  been  made  of  this  advantage,  the  Syriac  version  would  be  the  most 
valuable  commentary  on  the  New  Testament.  Many  obscure  passages 
would  be  made  clear,  if  the  words  were  still  on  record  which  Jesus  spoke 
with  his  disciples  in  the  Aramaean  language.  But  the  translator  appears 
not  to  have  been  fortunate  in  rendering  passages  of  this  nature.  .  .  .  This 
circumstance  alone  affords  sufficient  evidence  that  the  Syriac  version  was 
not  written  by  one  of  Christ's  immediate  disciples." — Ibid.  p.  44.  **The 
Syriac  version  ....  leads  us  sometimes  to  just  and  beautiful  explana- 
tions, where  other  help  is  insufficient,  e.  g.  Matt.  vi.  7 ;  John  xvL  2 ;  Rom. 
ix.  22 ;  and  xiii.  8 ;  and  confirms  some  ancient  rites  in  which  we  are  deeply 
interested,  such  as  the_  celebration  of  Sunday,  1  Cor.  xi.  20.  And  in  dis- 
covering either  the  meaning  of  an  unusual  word,  or  the  unusual  meaning 
of  a  common  word,  where  no  assistance  can  be  had  from  the  Greek  authors 
the  Syriac  version  may  be  of  singular  service,  as  the  translator  was  proba. 
bly  acquainted  with  the  language  of  common  life,  as  well  as  the  language 
of  books;  and  is,  at  least,  of  equal  authority  with  a  Greek  lexicon  of  later 
ages.'* — ^p.  45.  **The  chief  advantage  to  be  derived  from  the  Syriac  ver- 
sion is,  in  applying  it  to  the  purposes  of  criticism.  Its  high  antiquity,  and 
frequent  deviation  from  the  common  reading  in  passages  of  importance, 
must  recommend  the  use  of  it  to  every  critic,  who  in  general  will  find  him- 
self rewarded  for  his  trouble.  .  .  .  The  difference  between  the  Syriac  ver- 
sion and  the  greatest  part  of  the  Greek  manuscripts,  is  no  ground  for 
condemning  the  former.  It  is  natural  to  suppose,  from  its  great  antiquity, 
that  it  must  deviate  in  many  cases  from  the  Greek  manuscripts,  the  oldest 
of  which  were  written  above  four  hundred  years  later,  and  are  mostly  the  ♦ 
productions  of  countries  remote  from  Syria.  ** 

MANUSCRIPTS   OP  THE    FB8HITTO    imW  TESTAMENT. 

The  manuscript  used  in  compiling  the  first  printed  edition  of  the  Peshitto 
New  Testament  were  not  more  than  two  for  the  Gospels,  and  probably  not 
more  than  one  for  the  other  books.  These  manuscripts  cannot  now  be  iden- 
tified. Subsequent  editions  differ  from  the  first  but  little,  and  that  little 
generally  only  by  conjectural  emendations ;  though  one  or  two  manuscripts 
have  been  used — very  sparingly — by  here  and  there  an  editor.  In  conse- 
quence, nearly  all  of  the  various  readings  given  in  the  later  editions  (except 
the  American)  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  are  only  variants  of  the  sev- 
eral printed  editions,  recording,  for  by  far  the  larger  part,  conjectures  merely. 

But  manuscripts  of  the  Peshitto  New  Testament  are  very  numerous;  and 
not  a  few  of  them  date  from  high  antiquity.  To  describe  even  a  fair  selec 
tion  of  them  would  fill  about  as  much  space  as  this  entire  volume.  The 
chief  collections  are  in  the  British  Museum,  at  London;  the  Vatican,  at 
Rome;  the  Royal  Library,  at  Berlin;  the  National  Library,  at  Paris;  with 
minor  collections  in  the  other  chief  cities  and  libraries  of  England  and  Italy. 
Others  exist  in  Oriental  libraries,  and  not  a  few  in  the  public  and  private 
libraries  of  America.  For  fuller  information  on  this  extensive  subject,  ref- 
erence may  be  had  to  Joseph  Simon  Assemani's  BibliotJieca  OrieniaMs  of  the 
Clementino-Vatican  Library,  Rome,  1719—1728;  Stephen  Evodius  Assemani'e 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  11.  495 

Bihliothecae  Apostolicae  Vaticanae  Oodieum  Manuscriptorum  CataloguSy  Rome, 
1768—1759;  Angelo  Mai's  Nova  Collectio,  torn,  v.,  Rome,  1831;  S.  E.  As- 
semani's  catalogue  of  the  Oriental  MSS.  in  the  Mediceo-Laurentian  Library 
at  Florence;  Rosen  and  Forshall's  Catalogue,  London,  1838,  and  William 
Wright's  Catalogue,  1870—1872,  of  Syriac  Manuscripts  in  the  British  Muse- 
um ;  R.  Payne  Smith's  Catalogue  of  Syriac  etc.  MSS.  in  the  Bodleian  Li- 
brary, Oxford,  1864;  the  Catalogue  (by  H.  Zotenberg)  of  Syriac  etc.  MSS. 
in  the  National  Library,  Paris,  1874 ;  Sachau's  Verzeiehniss  of  the  Syriac  etc. 
MSS.  in  the  Berlin  Royal  Library,  Berlin,  1885 ;  and  W.  Wright's  article 
**  Syriac  Literature,"  in  the  last  edition  of  the  Encyclopaedia  Britannica. 

The  older  writers,  as  J.  G.  0.  Adler,  author  of  N.  T.  V.  Syr.,  Copenha- 
gen, 1789,  pay  a  good  deal  of  attention  to  the  two  general  classes  of  New 
Testament  manuscripts  viz. :  The  Jacobite  and  the  Nestorian ;  the  former 
written  in  Mesopotamia,  Syria,  Palestine  and  Egypt;  the  latter  in  Persia, 
but  somewhat  also  in  or  near  Mesopotamia,  and  in  the  East  Indies.  But 
most  of  the  differences  belong  to  later  manuscripts,  and  are  little  more  than 
such  changes  as  might  be  introduced  by  different  voweling,  or  by  the  natu- 
ral infirmity  of  scribes.  The  older  copies,  too,  are  for  the  most  part  written 
in  the  Estranghelo  character,  and  unaffected  by  differences  in  alphabet  or 
vocalization.  The  differences  between  the  two,  however,  were  noticed  by 
the  native  scholars,  and  formed  no  small  portion  of  the  matter  treated  in  the 
Jacobite  commentaries,  and,  likewise,  a  large  portion  of  the  subject-matter 
of  certain  manuscripts  often  called  the  **  Syriac  Massora,"  and  of  the  books 
formerly  considered  as  proving  the  existence  of  a  *  *  Karkaphensian  Version, " 
but  now  known  to  be  merely  a  collection  of  various  readings  or  corrections. 

Few  manuscripts  of  the  Peshitto — scarcely  a  dozen— <;on tain  in  addition 
the  epistles,  2d  Peter,  «d  and  3d  John,  and  Jude.  Not  more  than  one  or 
two  and  those  later  than  the  printing  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament,  have 
added  the  Apocalypse.  None  contain  the  story  of  the  adulteress,  John  vii. 
53  to  viii.  11,  nor  the  text  of  the  three  Heavenly  Witnesses,  1  John  v.  7,  nor 
Lake  xxii.  17,  IS.j/So  much  of  these  four  passages  as  is  to  be  found  in  any 
Syriac  New  Testament  comes  from  ^yriac  Manuscript  written  on  Mt  Leba- 
nbn  in  162Q^  .and  brought  thence  for  Archbishop  iJsshef,  who'Turnished 
them  from  it  for  Walton's  Polyglott.  This  manuscript  was  lost  for  two 
centuries  and  a  half,  but  was  discovered  a  few  years  since  by  the  Rev.  Prof. 
John  Gwynn,  D.  D.,  in  the  Library  of  Trinity  College,  Dublin. 

The  order  of  books  in  the  Nestorian  manuscripts  of  the  New  Testament  is 
the  foUowina:  the  four  Gospels  in  their  usual  order;  Acts,  James,  1st  Peter, 
1st  John;  the  *' fourteen  "  Epistles  of  Paul,  including  and  ending  with  He- 
brews. The  Gospels  usually  form  a  volume  by  themselves,  called  **The 
Gospel,"  and  are  usually  divided^  with  a  marginal  ijumberinor,  into  sections, 
each  section  much  longer  than  one  of  our  chapters.  The  numbering  runs 
separately  through  each  Dook,  ana  also  continuously  through  the  four,  giv- 
ing a  double  numbering  for  all  the  Gospels  except  the  first. {!' The  rest  bf^ 
the  books,  in  the  order  above  given,  are  usually  considered  another  volume, 
and  called  *'The  Apostles."  Acts  and  the  above  Catholic  Epistles  are  num- 
bered in  sections  as  one  book,  and  Paul's  Epistles  (with  Hebrews)  as  another. 


1 


Digitized  by 


Google 


496  APPENDIX  II. 

I  These  section  numbers  may  be  seen  in  the  American  Missionaries' Testament 

i  of  1846. 

Besides  these  sections,  the  Manuscripts  also  frequently  exhibit  the  divis- 
ion into  Lessons  for  public  worship,  wliich  are  usually  248  for  the  Gospel, 
and  345  for  the  Apostles.  These  lessons  average  in  length  about  16i  of  our 
verses,  though  varying  according  to  continuity  of  subject  or  the  solemnity 
of  the  day  to  which  they  are  assigned.  They  are  so  arranged  and  used  that 
the  whole  New  Testament  (of  the  Peshitto  books)  is  read  in  public  service 
during  the  year. 

The  Nestorian  New  Testament  manuscripts  have  continued  the  use  of  the 
Estranghelo  character  down  nearly  to  the  present  day.  The  Jacobite  man. 
nscripts,  since  about  a.  d.  800,  slide  more  into  the  cursive  character,  like 
that  of  our  printed  books.  Certain  late  ones  abound  in  vowels  and  diacritic 
points,  and  really  bear  the  character  of  a  critical  edition. 

BDITIONS  OF  THE  FfiSHITTO  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

_  Jhe  first  edition  ^ft«^  ftrjntif^  "^i  Y'^l^^a-  ^  1555.  at  the  expense  of  the 
Emperor,  Ferdinand  I.,  prompted  by  the  Chancellor,  Albert  Widmanstadt. 
It  was  intended  for  distribution  among  the  Jacobite  Christians  in  the  East, 
whose  Patriarch,  in  the  year  1553,  sent  Mose$  of  Mardin,  as  his  envoy  to 
Europe,  for  the  twofold  purpose  of  cementing  a  Union  with  the  See  of  Rome, 
and  procuring  the  printing  of  the  Syriac  New  Testament  for  the  use  of  his 
people.  MoseB  of  Ma/rdin  brought  with  him  a  manuscript  copy,  prepared  in 
the  East ;  and  likewise  superintended  the  press.  One  other  manuscript,  con- 
taining the  Four  Gospels,  was  also  consulted.  The  edition  was  neatly  and 
accurately  printed  in  4to.,  containing  the  simple  text,  with  the  church  les- 
sons noted,  and  embracing  all  the  books  of  the  New  Testament,  except  the 
2d  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  the  Epistle  of  Jude,  and  the 
Apocalypse.    It  also  omitted  the  story  of  the  Adulteress.     This  edition  is  rare. 

2.  In  1569,  Immanitel  TremeUitu  republished,  at  Geneva,  in  folio,  the  edi- 
tion of  Vienna,  in  Hebrew  characters,  and  accompanied  it  with  a  Latin  trans- 
lation made  by  himself,  alsb'the  Greek  text.  He  likewise  had  a  Syriac  man- 
uscript, but  he.  made  little  use  of  it.     Republished  at  Lyons,  1571.  v 

8.  In  1571,  GiyleFevredelaBoderiej  (Boderianus^)  reprinted  the  same 
text,  both  in  Syriac  and  Hebrew  letters,  accompanied  with  a  Latin  transla- 
tion, in  the  third  volume  of  the  Antwerp  Polyglott  Bible.  Boderie  also 
had  a  Syriac  manusci^pt,  brought  from  the  East  by  William  Postell,  from 
which  he  drew  some  various  readings. 

4  and  5.  The  fourth  and  fifth  editions  were  in  Hebrew  letters,  and  with- 
out points,  printed  at  Antwerp,  by  Plantin,  in  1573  and  1575;  the  first  in 
8vo.  the  other  18mo.  ' 

6.  In  1584,  La  Boderie  reprinted,  at  Paris,  4to.,  the  Syriac  text  in  Hebrew 
letters,  with  an  interlinear  Latin  translation. 

7.  In  1599,  EUasEutter  inserted  Tremellius*  Hebrew  Syriac  text  in  his 
Polyglott  New  Testament,  and  supplied  the  deficient  Books  by  Syriac  of  his 
own  making. 

8.  In  1621,  Martin  Trosty  at  Kothen,  in  Anhalt,  reprinted  the  Syriac  text 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPEISTDIX  II.  497 

of  the  Vienna  edition,  in  f  air  Syriac  types,  with  a  Latin  translation;  1  vol. 
4to.     Some  copies  are  dated  16^2." 

,^itherto,^tUe  2d  Epistle. of  Peter;  the  2d  and  3d  of  John,  the  epistle  of 
Jude,  and  the  Apocalypse,  had  not  been  print&d  tioxa  manuscripts.  But  in 
1Q27,  ZouU  de  Dieu  published,  at  Leyden,  the  Apocalypse,  from  a  manu- 
script now  in  Leyden,  which  had  been  the  property  of  Scaliger ;  and  in 
1630,  Edward  Pococke  published,  also  at  Leyden,  the  four  lacking  Epistles, 
from  a  manuscript  in  the  Bodleian  library  at  Oxford.  (They  are,  however, 
no  part  of  the  Peshitto,  but  of  the  Philoxenian  Version.)  And  since  that 
time,  nearly  all  the  editions  of  the  Peshitto  New  Testament  have  contained 
these  books,  thus  completing  the  New  Testament  Canon. 

9.  In  1645,  the  Peshitto  New  Testament  was  inserted  in  the  Paris  Poly- 
glott,  copied  from  the  Antwerp  Polyglott,  and  enlarged  by  the  insertion, 
from  the  source  just  mentioned,  of  the  wanting  Epistles  and  the  Apoca- 
lypse; the  whole  being  revised  and  corrected  by  Oahriel  Sionita. 

10.  In  1657,  the  London  Polyglott  republished  the  entire  Syriac  New 
Testament  from  theTaris  Polyglott,  and  added,  for  the  first  time,  the  histo- 
ry of  the  Adulteress,  from  a  manuscript  belonging  to  Archbishop  Ussher, 
Republished,  with,  new  title,  1698. 

11.  In  1664,  Oiles  Outlier  published  his  Syriac  New  Testament  at  Ham- 
burg, in  a  moderate  sized  12mo.  volume,  for  common  use.  His  text  is  that 
of  Trost,  with  some  amendments,  and  is  followed  with  a  list  of  various 
readings,  chiefly  derived  from  the  printed  editions.  This  is  a  cheap  edition 
and  very  common,  and  it  would  be  a  good  edition  if  the  typography  were 
what  it  should  be.  It  is  generally  accompanied  with  a  good  compendious 
Lexicon  to  fhe  Syriac  New  Testament.  Reprinted  many  times  down  as  late 
as  1749.  ^The  copies  dated  1664  differ  in  typographical  and  other  details, 
and  the  differences  are  reproduced  in  the  different  later  editions.y 

12.  In  1684,  Christian  Knorre  reprinted,  in  12mo.,  at  Sulzbacti,  Plantin's 
edition  of  1573,  in  Hebrew  letters.  This  edition  does  not  contain  the  anti- 
legomena,  i.  e. :  the  epistles  of  2d  Peter,  2d  and  3d  John,  and  Jude. 

13.  In  1703,  the  Gongregatio  de  Propaganda  Fide,  at  Rome,  printed  the 
New  Testament,  Syriac  and  Arabic,  in  2  vols.,  folio,  tor  the  use  of  the 
Maronites. 

14.  In  1708,  and  '9,  John  Leusden  and  Charles  Schaaf  published  at  Leyden 
their  excellent  edition,  Syriac  and  Latin,  in  large  4to.,  with  a  copious  list  of 
the  various  readings  in  different  editions.  This  edition  was  re-issued  by 
BchaafiTL  1717.  He  also  published,  with  both  editions,  his  highly  esteemed 
Lexicon  Syriacum  Concordantiale  in  Novum  Test.  Syr.,  in  large  4to. 

15.  In  1713,  the  Schaafian  text,  with  various  readings  inserted  in  brack- 
ets in  the  text,  was  inserted  in  the  Biblia  Quadralinguia  of  Christian  Bemeo- 
cius,  Leyden,  folio.     Republished,  1747. 

16.  In  1805,  Richard  Jones  republished,  at  Oxford,  in  4to.,  the  Schaafian 
text,  corrected  by,  or  at  least,  with  a  collation  of,  two  Syriac  manuscripts  in 
the  Bodleian  Library,  and  the  Commentary  of  Bar-Hebraeus,  existing  in 
the  same  library. 

17.  In  1816,  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  published  at  London, 


Digitized  I3y 


Google 


498  APPENDIX  II. 

(Richard  WatU,  printer,)  a  very  beautiful  edition  of  the  Syriactext,  correct- 
ed by  manuscripts,  in  553  pages,  4 to.,  intended  for  distribution  iu  India. 
**Thi8  edition,"  says  Mr.  Home,  *•  was  corrected  for  the  press,  as  far  as  the 
Acta  of  the  Apostles,  by  the  late  Rev.  Dr.  Buchanan,  and  was  completed  by 
Rev.  Samuel  Lee,  D.  D.,  Professor  of  Arabic  in  the  University  of  Cambridge." 
The  copies  vary  in  title  and  prefatory  matter. 

18.  In  1826,  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  reprinted  their  edition 
of  1816,  in  a  fair,  but  smaller  type,  in  860  pages,  4to.  This  edition  was, 
probably,  superintended  by  Professor  Lee,  Reprinted,  1828.  Copies  vary 
like  the  last.     Some  bear  no  date. 

19.  In  1824,  under  the  superintendence  of  SUvestrede  8acy,  was  published 
at  Paris  a  beautiful  edition,  Carshun  and  Syriac  in  parallel  columns,  4to. 

20.  Bagster,  in  1828,  published  an  edition  in  12mo,  with  ^Syriac  preface 
by  W.  Greenfield,  with  various  readings,  and  a  revision  of'tKe'lexicon  of 
GUes  Outhler,  This  has  been  repeatedly  re-issued,  generally  without  date. 
Its  text  also  occurs  in  Bagster's  Triglott  Gospels,  1828,  4 to. 

21.  In  1836  an  edition  was  published  by  Macintosh  at  London,  Syriac  in 
Hebrew  letters,  12mo. 

22.  In  1846,  the  Missionaries  of  the  A.  B.  C.  F.  M.,  at  Oroomia,  in  Per- 
sia, having  completed  their  translation  of  the  New  Testament  into  the  ver- 
nacular dialect  of  the  modern  Nestorians,  printed  it  with  the  Syriac  text, 
in  parallel  columns,  and  both  in  the  modern  Nestorian  character,  with  a 
marginal  notice  of  all  the  deviations  of  the  Syriac  from  the  Greek  text: 
printed  at  Oroomia,  in  one  vol.,  large  4to.  The  Syriactext  of  this  edition 
was  constructed  from  the  edition  of  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society, 
with  modifications  from  Walton's  Polyglott  and  ancient  native  Nestorian 
manuscripts.  Its  Ancient  Syriac  text  has  been  reprinted  at  New  York, 
16mo.,  in  1878,  and  again,  revised  and  corrected,  1886,  and  repeatedly. 

23.  At  London,  in  1876,  was  published  anonymously  the  Syriac  text  with 
an  English  translation,  4to.  *'         6fe^^^/o-l^^<^^    f 

24.  At  London  in  1875,  was  published  by  Dichimon,  in  a  Hexaglott,  re- 
peated, 1890,  in  a  Triglott,  the  Syriac  text;  that  of  Walton's  Polyglott,  4to- 

It  has  often  been  regretted,  that  the  editors  of  the  Peshitto  New  Testa- 
ment have  taken  so  little  pains  to  collate  manuscripts,  and  to  obtain  a  cor- 
rect text.  They  have  for  the  most  part,  followed  iht  editio  princeps,  with 
some  changes  in  the  vowel  points,  and  have  admitted  but  few  changes  of 
words  on  the  authority  of  manuscripts.^  The^  received  textjjLjs^said^ap- 
pears  to  have  been  derived  chiefly  from  the  Nestorian  family  Qfjnanuscripts, 
and  needs  a  thorough  collation,  especially  with  manuscripts^  of  _Oxfi ^^51^- 
ite  family.  But  a  critical  edition,  edited' by  G,  H.  GwUliam,  based  on  the 
most  ancient  manuscripts,  is  about  to  be  issued  from  the  Oxford  Uni- 
versity Press. 

Among  the  paris  of  the  New  Testament,  an  edition  of  the  Gospels  m  Nes- 
torian type,  edited  from  two  Nestorian  Mss.  of  Joseph  Wolff,  by  Thomas 
Pell  Piatt,  was  published  by  the  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  m  1829, 
4to,  and  is  worthy  of  mention.     In  1877  the  Roman   Catholic  missionaries 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  11.  499 

In  Oroomia  published  an  edition  of  the  Gospels  and  the  Acts,  with  a  trans- 
lation of  the  same  in  the  spoken  language  of  the  Nestorians  of  that  district. 
They  seem  to  have  followed  closely  the  text  used  by  the  American  Mission- 
aries in  their  publications  The  New  Testament  has  also  been  printed  at 
Mosul  within  a  few  yearsZ^Prof.  John  Gwynn,  D.  D.,  of  Triuity  College, 
Dublin,  has  in  press  an  efTition  of  the  Apocalypse,  from  an  older  and  better 
manuscript.  Among  many  other  instances,  this  MS.  is  free  from  the  gross 
mistake  in  Rev.  viii.  13.     (See  p.  452,  and  foot-note.) 

THE  CURETONIAN  VERSION  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

This  version  was  discovered  by  the  Rev.  Dr.  Cureton,  in  one  of  the  man- 
uscripts brought  to  the  British  Museum  in  1842  from  the  Monastery  of  St. 
Mary  Deipara,  in  the  valley  of  the  Natron  Lakes,  near  Egypt.  It  consisted 
of  portions  of  three  ancient  copies,  bound  together  to  form  a  volume  of  the 
Four  Gospels,  with  a  few  leaves  in  a  more  recent  hand  added  to  make  up 
the  deficiencies.  This  binding  together  was  done  a.  d.  1221 ;  but  the  por- 
tions are  of  the  fifth  century.  Other  leaves  were  found  among  the  manu- 
scripts brought  at  the  same  time;  and  the  whole  put  together  and  rebound. 
The  volume  consists  of  fragments  of  Matthew,  Mark,  John  and  Luke,  arranged 
in  this  order.  They  were  published  in  quarto,  with  a  very  inadequate  Eng- 
lish translation,  by  Dr.  Cureton,  in  1858. 

Since  then  an  additional  fragment  was  discovered  by  Koedisrer,  and  by 
him  published  in  the  Monthly  of  the  Berlin  Academy  of  Sciences,  July, 
1872;  reprinted  the  same  year  by  W.  Wright,  uniform  with  Cureton's  edi- 
tion. This  appears  to  be  the  oldest  known  Syriac  version.  Attempts  have 
(been  made  to  restore  the  Greek  text  it  represents;  the  best  by  Prof.  Fried- 
.. 'lich  Baethgen,  Leipzig,  1885. 
SC*-*  /       An  ancient  manuscript,  palimpsest,  of  the  Curetonian  version,  has  recent- 


,  -  ;Jf.^ 'rich  Baethgen,  Leipzig,  1885, 

)\^^    /      An  ancient  manuscripta  paliuipswsi^,  ui  tue  vurctuuiauvtsrsiuu,  u 
I    ly  been  discovered  at  the  Monastery  of  St.  Catharine,  at  Mt.  Sin^i 


For  further  particulars  see  the  original  edition  of  Cureton,  and  Wm. 
"Wright's  article,  *•  Syriac  Literature "  in  the  last  edition  of  the  Encyclo- 
pedia Britannica;  also  published  separately. 

THE  PHILOXENIAN  AND  HARCLENSIAN  VERSIONS. 

Until  recent  years  the  Philoxenian  version  and  its  revision,  the  Harclen- 
sian,  have  been  generally  confounded  together,  because  it  was  generally 
supposed  that  the  original  unrevised  Philoxenian  was  lost.  But  more  care- 
ful investigation  has  shown  conclusively  that  the  Epistles  not  found  in  the 
Peshitto,  but  printed  in  our  ordinary  Syriac  New  Testaments,  viz.,  2d  Peter, 
2d  and  3d  John  and  Jude,  are  the  original,  unrevised  Philoxenian.  Besides 
the  manuscript  from  which  these  were  first  published,  by  Pococke,  in  1630, 
a  number  of  others  exist  in  various  libraries,  and  may  be  found  described  in 
the  works  mentioned  above  under  the  head  of  Manuscripts  of  the  Peshitto 
New  Testament;  besides  another  mentioned  in  J.  J.  Wetstein's  Greek  New 
Testament  1751.  But  none  of  these  have  ever  been  used  for  the  purpose  of 
emending  the  very  faulty  text  of  Pococke. 
In  1886  these  Epistles  were  published  in  phototype  fac-simile  by  Isaac  H. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


500  APPENDIX  II. 

Hall,  from  an  excellent  manuscript  owned  by  Robert  S.  Williams,  of  Utica, 
N.  Y. ;  and  in  the  same  year  the  American  Bible  Society  permitted  these 
Epistles  in  their  Ancient  Syriac  New  Testament  to  be  corrected  from  this 
manuscript,  **in  cases  of  obvious  errors.*'  One  of  these  is  2d  Peter  ii.  1, 
where  for  **  But  in  the  world  '* — an  error  caused  by  the  mistake  of  one  let- 
ter,— the  true  reading,  **  R^t  ftfi[|ont|[  the  people.^*  has^now  befi^ff'^rred. 

The  other  portions  of  the  original  Philoxenian  New  Testament  were  sup- 
posed to  be  irrecoverably  lost ;  but  Bernstein  supposed  that  he  had  discov- 
ered the  Gospels  in  the  "  Codex  Angelicus  **  at  Florence  (see  his  **  Gospel  of 
John  **  in  Syriac,  Leipzig,  1853);  and  much  more  probably  have  they  been 
discovered  by  Isaac  H.  Hall,  who  found  them  in  1875  in  the  **  Beirut  Manu- 
script,'* a  codex  of  the  ninth  century,  belonging  to  the  Syrian  Protestant 
College  at  Beirut,  and  deposited  in  the  library  of  the  Union  Theological 
Seminary,  New  York.  From  this  he  published  three  phototype  fac-simile 
leaves,  in  1883.  . 

^^Premising  this,  we  may  let  Dr.  Murdock's  matter  stand  almost  exactly  as 
he  left  it ;  but  it  is  to  be  understood  that  the  version  of  Polycarp,  mentioned 
below,  IS  the  true  Philoxenian;  while  the  revision  by  Thomas  of  Harkel, 
or  Heraclea,  is  the  Harclensian.  It  was  customary,  as  said  above,  to  con- 
found the  names ;  and  White's  edition,  mentioned  below,  was  entitled  **  Phi- 
loxenian,'* though  really  Harclensian^  The  printed  edition  knft^p  tc^  ^nr- 
dock^  if  not  all  the  manuscripts  known  to  him,  was  Harclensian ;  not  at  all 
Thiloxenian  in  fact.  '     "  **  ^"^ 

THBIR  ORIGIN. 

The  history  of  these  versions  is  given  in  the  Syriac  Indorsements  on 
the  manuscripts.  The  following  occurs  in  a  manuscript  of  the  Four 
Gospels  in  the  BibUotheca  Angelica  Sit  Kome: 

**This  Book  has  been  collated  with  two  accurate  manuscripts.  This 
Book  of  the  four  Holy  Evangelists  was  translated  from  the  Greek  tongue 
into  Syriac,  with  great  accuracy  and  much  labor,  firsb  in  the  city  of  Mabug, 
in  the  days  of  the  holy  Mar  Philoxsnus,  confessor,  bishop  of  that  city. 
It  was  afterwards  collated  with  much  diligence  by  me,  Thomas,  a  poor 
sinner,  with  three  [margin^  and  other  M88,,  two]  highly  approved  and 
accurate  Greek  copies,  at  Enaton  [i.  e.,  the  Ninth-mile  Village]  of  the 
great  city  Alexandria,  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Anthony;  in  order  that 
its  writing  might  be  to  me  for  the  profit  of  my  sinful  soul,  and  for  that  of 
the  many  that  love  and  seek  to  know  and  preserve  the  profitable  accuracy 
of  the  Divine  Books.  It  was  written  and  collated,  at  the  place  above 
named,  in  the  year  927  of  Alexander,  in  the  4th  Indiction.  But  how  much 
labor  and  anxiety  I  had  with  it  and  with  its  fellows  [i.  e.^  the  Acts  and 
Epistles]  the  Lord  only  knoweth.  He  who  will  recompense  to  eve^  man 
according  to  his  works  in  [the  day  of]  his  just  and  righteous  Judgment." 

.  Adler  cites  two  other  similar  manuscript  indorsements,  which,  after 
the  words  *' first  in  the  city  of  Mabug,"  insert  "in  the  year  819  of 
Alexander  the  Macedonian,  in  the  days  of  the  holy  Mar  Philoxbnus, 
confesssor,  bishop  of  that  city.     It  was  afterwards,"  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  IL  501 

From  these  indorsements,  it  appears  that  this  translation  was  made  at 
MABua,  or  MenMj,  as  it  is  called  in  Arabic,  the  Hierapolis  of  the  Greeks,  a 
city  of  Syria,  near  the  Euphrates,  and  the  See  of  both  a  Nestorian  and  a 
Jacobite  Bishop:  and  that  it  was  made  in  the  year  819  of  Alexander,  that 
ia^^j^jlflg^nd  in  the  days  of  Philoxenus^  the  Bishop  of  Mabug.  It  is  not 
said  that  it  was  made  fty  Philozenus,  but  only  in  his  days.  This  PhiloxenuSy 
otherwise  called  Xenaias^  was  the  Monophysite  Bishop  of  Mabug,  from  a.  d. 
488  to  A.  D.  518,  (^see  Assemani's  Bibliotheca  Orient,  torn.  ii.  p.  10 — 46) ; 
but  he  did  not  sit  quietly  on  his  throne.  Being  a  warm  partisan  of  PeUr 
Fullo,  he  was  in  sharp  conflict  nearly  all  his  life,  and  he  could  have  had  but 
little  leisure  for  biljlical  studies.  The  persecutions  he  suffered,  procured  for 
him  the  title  of  Confessor  among  his  own  sectjNr  According  to  Moses  Aghaeus^ 
(in  AssemanVs  Bibliotheca  Orient,  tom.  ii.  en.  10,)  one  Poltcarp,  a  rural 
Bishop  under  Philoxeuus,  made  this  translation ;  and  dedicated  it,  in  the 
year  specified,  to  Philoxenus,  by  whom  he  had  been  prompted  to  undertake 
the  work.  And  hence  this  version  is  often  called  the  Translation  of  Polyearp. 
It  is  this  version  from  which  the  epistles  published  by  Pooocke  (see  under  No.  8, 

It  further  appears,  from  these  Indorsements,  that  about  100  years  after 
this  version  was  made  by  Polyearp,  one  Thomas,  a  monk,  at  Enaton,  at  the 
ninth  milestone  out  of  Alexandria,  and  in  the  monastery  of  St.  Anthony,  in 
that  city,  revised  and  re-wrote  this  translation,  collating  it  with  two  (or 
some  indorsements  say,  three)  highly  approved  Greek  manuscripts.  This 
was  in  the  year  of  Alexander  937,  or  a.  d._616.  Who  this  Thomas  was, 
and  when  and  where  he  live(i^  we  learn  from  Bar-Hebra^eus^  Chronicon, 
(year  of  the  Seleucidse  927,  or  a.  d.  616.)  Bar-Hebraeus  there  says: — 
"About  this  time  flourished  Th,omas  Harclensis,  (i  e.  Thomas  of  Harkel, 
the  Syriac  form  of  Heraclea,  an  obscure  village  in  Palestine),  a  monk  of 
the  monastery  of  Taril ;  who  in  his  childhood,  learned  Greek  in  the  Kfenser- 
ine  monastery,  and  was  afterwards  Bishop  of  Mabug.  Being  persecuted  by 
Domitian,  the  Meletian,  he  went  to  Egypt,  and  resided  in  the  Enaton  of 
Alexandria,  in  the  holy  monastery  of  the  Antonies;  where,  with  praise- 
worthy diligence,  he  restored,  by  a  very  exact  and  accurate  emendation,  the 
holy  Codex  of  the  Gospels,  and  the  other  Books  of  the  New  Testament, 
after  the  flrst  version  of  them  by  the  procuration  of  Philoxenus^  of  Mabug. " 
— From  this  statement,  and  from  an  inspection  of  the  manuscripts,  it  ap- 
pears, that  Thomas  Harclensis  corrected  the  text  of  Polyearp* s  translation ; 
added  various  readings,  derived  from  his  collation  of  Greek  manuscripts ; 
and  subjoined  other  marginal  notices,  especially  the  division  into  Lessons 
for  the  public  worship  through  the  year.  That  he  did  not  materially  alter 
the  text  of  Polyearp,  Adler  infers  from  a  manuscript  that  he  examined  at 
Florence,  which  had  none  of  the  marginal  notes  and  indorsements  of  the 
Harclensian  recension,  yet  contained  almost  precisely  the  same  text ;  whence 
he  concluded,  that  it  was  copied  from  an  ancient  manuscript  of  Polycarp's 
version,  written  before  its  revision  by  Thomas  Harclensis,  Bernstein  thinks 
the  codex  Angelicus  more  nearly  represents  the  original  Philoxenian.  The 
Gospels  of  the  Beirut  MS.,  a  codex  of  the  ninth  century,  present  stronger 


Digitized  by 


Google 


503  APPENDIX  IL 

claims  than  either  to  be  considered  as  the  true  Philoxenian.  But  Adler's 
inlereDce  is  of  force  ouiy  so  far  as  tDe  (jrospeU  are  COBcern^d,  kud  it  is  borne 
out  so  far  by  all  that  we  know.  But  the  Epistles  were  much  revised  bj 
Thomas. 

Such  is  them^tn  of  the  Harclensian  wrHon,  It  is  the  translation  of  Polp' 
carp  as  revised,  and  furnished  with  marginal  notes,  by  Thomas  Habclensib. 
It  was  exclusively  of  Joeo&ite  origin ;  audit  never  obtained  currency  among 
the  other  oriental  sects.  Yet  it  was  not  made  for  any  sectarian  purposes ; 
nor  in  hostility  to  the  Peshitto  version.  The  sole  aim  of  its  author  and  revi- 
ser, was,  to  produce  a  Synac  version,  which  should  more  perfectly  resemble 
the  Greek  original  as  it  existed  in  their  times. — It  embraces  all  the  books  of 
the  New  Testament,  except  the  Apocalypse.  The  history  of  the  adulteress, 
is  also  wanting;  but  not  so  the  2d  Epistle  of  Peter,  the  2d  and  8d  of  John, 
and  the  Epistle  of  J  ude.  How  much  these  portions  were  revised  by  Thomas 
may  be  seen  by  comparing  them  with  the  same  Epistles  in  the  ordinary  Syr- 
Jac  .New  Testament.     The  latter  are  the  unrev*\5gq  PBllflk^niam' 

GHARACTBR  AND  VALUE  OF  THIS   VERSION. 

The  prominent  characteristic  of  the  Harclensian  version,  is  extreme  terviU- 
ty,  even  to  the  habitual  sacrifice  of  the  purity  and  propriety  of  the  Syriac 
language.  But  much  that  a  reader  of  the  Peshitto  might  think  to  be  servil- 
ity, is  merely  a  common  expression  in  the  Syriac  of  later  times.  It  gener. 
ally  copies  the  Greek  phraseology  so  exactly,  that  it  would  often  not  be 
difficult  to  translate  it  back  again  into  the  identical  words  of  the  original. 
As  the  Syriac  has  no  article^  the  definite  article  of  the  Greek  is  often  ex- 
pressed (as  indeed  by  Syriac  writers  of  all  ages,)  by  the  Syriac  pronouns  for 
Ae,  shcj  and  thet/.  The  Greek  expletives,  which  could  not  be  expressed  in 
Syriac,  are  sometimes  transcribed  in  the  translation.  Greek  compounds  are 
awkwardly  expressed,  by  two  or  more  words  in  strange  combination. 
Greek  diminutives  are  imitated  in  the  Syriac.  The  Greek  construction  is 
followed,  as  closely  as  possible,  without  the  strictest  regard  to  the  laws  of 
Syriac  construction.  And  in  all  the  proper  nameSf  even  those  of  Hebre*v 
origin,  the  Greek  orthography  is,  in  some  manuscripts,  imitated  in  Syriac 
letters,  though  subversive  of  every  trace  of  the  etymology,  and  perverting 
the  true  pronunciation.  Even  the  case  endings  of  these  names  are  retained; 
— as  sometimes  occurs  also  in  the  Peshitto;  which  could  only  serve  to  puzzle 
the  brains  of  a  Syrian  who  '^id  not  understand  Greek. 

Of  the  value  of  this  translation  J,  B,  Michadis^  (in  his  Introduction  to  the 
New  Testament,  vol.  ii.  p.  1.  p.  67,  &c.,  ed.  Marsh,)  says:  **The  intrinsic 
worth  of  the  Philoxenian  version,  admits  no  comparison  with  that  of  the 
Peshitto.  The  style  is  much  inferior,  and  more  difficult  to  be  uiiderstood ; 
the  version  is  less  accurate ;  and  the  translator  was  less  acquainted  with  the 
Greek.  It  is  neither  so  valuable  to  a  divine^  for  the  purpose  of  instruction 
in  the  Christian  religion ;  nor  to  the  learned  expositor^  as  a  means  of  explain- 
ing difficult  and  doubtful  passages.  But  the  version  is  not  devoid  of  value, 
and  is  of  real  importance  to  a  critic^  whose  object  is  to  select  a  variety  of 
readings,  with  the  view  of  restoring  the  genuine  text  of  the  Greek  originaL 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  II. 

For  he  may  be  fully  assured,  that  every  phrase  and  expression  is  a  precis^ 
copy  of  the  Greek  text,  as  it  stood  in  the  manuscript  from  which  the  ver- 
sion was  made.  But  it  is  not  prior  to  the  sixth  century ;  and  as  the  Peschito 
was  written  either  at  the  end  of  thej^rs^,  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  second 
century,  it  is  of  less  importance  to  know  the  readings  of  the  Greek  manu- 
script, that  was  used  in  the  former,  than  those  of  the  original  employed  in 
the  latter." 

EDITIONS  AND   MANUSCRIPTS   OP  THE  HARCLENSIAN  YER8I0N. 

The  Epistles,  2  Peter,  2  and  3  John,  and  Jude,  as  published  by  Pococke, 
in  1630,  and  thereafter  printed  in  Syriac  New  Testaments,  belong  to  the 
original  Philoxenian  version  by  Polycarp;  but  no  portion  of  the  Harclen- 
sian  version  was  printed  prior  to  the  year  1778.  Of  course,  up  to  that  time, 
the  learned  had  not  the  means  of  examining  it,  and  ascertaining  its  true 
character.  The  Rev.  Oloucester  Ridley^  LL.  D.,  Prebend  of  Salisbury,  about 
the  middle  of  the  last  century,  received  a  copy  of  the  entire  version,  brought . 
from  Amida  in  Mesopotamia,  by  a  Mr.  Palmer.  Ridley  immediately  applied 
himself  to  the  study  of  Syriac:  and  in  1761,  published  a  learned  Disserta- 
tion, de  Syriacarum  Novi  Testamenti  Venionum  Indole  et  Usu;  in  which  he 
gave  the  first  good  account  of  both  translations,  and  a  full  description  of  the 
Harclensian,  or  Philoxenian  as  it  was  then  generally  called.  He  also  pre- 
pared for  the  press,  a  copy  of  the  four  Gospels,  transcribed  from  his  Amidan 
manuscript,  and  collated  with  another  found  at  Oxford.  But  he  did  not 
live  to  see  it  published.  It  was  printed  at  Oxford,  Syriac  and  Latin,  with 
critical  notes  &c.,  by  Joseph  White^  Professor  of  Arabic,  in  1778,  2vols.  in 
1,  4to.  Professor  White  then  proceeded  to  prepare  the  remainder  of  the 
work  for  the  press;  and  published  the  book  of  Acts  and  the  seven  Catholic 
Epistles,  in  1799 ;  and  the  fourteen  Epistles  of  Paul,  in  1803,  uniform  with 
the  previous  volumes.  The  whole  is  ordinarily  bound  in  two  large  vols,  4to. 
This  edition,  is  the  only  complete  one  ever  printed.  The  Gospel  of  John 
was  printed  by  George  Henry  Bernstein^  Leipzig,  1853,  12mo. 

OTHER   SYRIAC   VERSIONS   OF   THE  NEW  TESTAMENT. 

Adler  found  in  the  Vatican  at  Rome,  a  manuscript  lectionary  in  an  idiom 
not  pure  Syriac,  but  approaching  the  Jewish  Aramaean,  and  in  characters 
approximate  to  the  Hebrew.  Adler  supposed  it  to  have  been  made  by  some 
Jewish  Christian,  about  the  fourth  century.  He  called  it  the  Hierosoly- 
MiTAN  Version.  It  has  been  familiarly  called  the  Jerusalem  Syriao  but 
is  now  generally  called  the  Palestinian  Version,  The  lectionary  above  men- 
tioned was  published  by  Count  F.  Miniscahhi  Erizeo^  1861,  at  Verona,  4to ; 
also,  posthumous,  by  Paul  de  Lagarde^  Gottingen,  1892,  4to.  Fragments 
of  both  the  Old  and  the  New  Testaments  were  published  by  Land^  in  tom. 
iv.  of  his  Anecdota,  1875.  Fragments  were  discovered  at  Sinai,  by  J, 
Sendel  Harris  and  published  by  him  in  1890.  Dr.  Harris  also  discovered  a 
complete  lectionary,  and  Mrs.  Lewis  another,  at  Mt.  Sinai,  which  are  pass- 
ing through  the  press.  In  1 893,  Hev.  Dr.  G.  H.  Gmlliam  published  five 
more  fragments  found  at  Cairo. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  II. 

^  A  have  called  the  Kabkaphbnsian  yebsion,   is  merely  a  series 

iassoretic  notes,  igfiving  variants  of  Peshitto,    Harklensian,   and 
aorities,  named  from  the  monastery  of  Earkaphta. 

SYKUC  TRANSUTIONS  OP  THE  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

Passing  on  to  the  Old  Testament,  we  find  there  two  distinct  translation* 
of  nearly  the  whole,  with  extant  fragments  of  a  tliird.  One  of  them  is  like- 
wise the  Peshitto^  and  is  very  ancient.  The  other  is  more  modern,  resembles 
the  Harclensian,  and  is  called  the  Syriae  Sexaplar.  The  known  fragments 
of  the  Hierosolymitan  Old  Testament  make  it  probable  that  the  whole  Bible 
existed  in  that  version.  Fragments  were  published  by  Gwilliarn  in  1893 
and  by  OwiUiam,    Burkitt  and  Stenning  in  1896. 

THE  PESHITTO  SYRIAC  OLD  TESTAMENT. 

This  version,  ns  appears  from  internal  evidence,  was  made  directly  from 
the  Hebrew,  and  before  the  Massoretic  points  came  into  use.  It  is  quoted 
and  commented  upon  by  Ephrem  Syrus,  in  the  fourth  century ;  and  has  en- 
joyed  the  same  reception  among  the  Aramaean  Christians,  of  whatever  sect, 
as  the  Peshitto  New  Testament.  The  learned  of  modem  times  entertain 
different  views  respecting  its  age,  some  supposing  it  to  be  older,  and  some 
later,  than  the  Peshitto  New  Testament;  but  the  actual  evidence  goes  no 
further  back  than  the  fourth  century.  From  some  diversities  in  the  mode 
of  translating  the  different  books,  it  appears  not  to  have  been  the  work  of 
one  man.  Its  style  of  translation,  too,  varies  from  that  of  a  close  transla- 
tion to  a  paraphrase  like  the  Jewish  Targums.  Many  think  it,  and  with 
pretty  good  reason,  to  be  **the  earliest  of  the  Targums."  It  is  generally 
concluded  to  have  a  Christianized-Jewish  character,  and  to  be  either  the 
work  of  Jewish  Christians ;  or  of  Jews  originally,  but  revised  by  Christians. 
It  is  universally  pronounced  to  be  a  judicious  and  faithful  translation;  and 
has  been  regarded  as  a  sure  guide  to  the  true  state  of  the  Hebrew  text  prob- 
ably as  early  as  the  second  century.  But  at  the  present  time,  many  com- 
petent scholars  are  very  busy  in  studying  the  Old  Testament  Peshitto,  the 
Septuagint,  and  the  Hejcaplar,  with  a  thoroughness  never  done  before ;  and 
it  is  not  certain  what  result  may  be  made  manifest.  The  Peshitto  Old  Tes- 
tament, however,  does  not  yield  precedence  to  the  Septuagint  or  the  Latin 
Vulgate  for  accuracy  or  fidelity,  while  its  style  is  more  easy  and  natural. 
It  is  more  servile  than  the  Peshitto  New  Testament,  and  throws  less  light 
on  the  meaning  of  the  original ;  yet  it  is  a  noble  version. 

Few  manuscripts  embrace  the  whole  Peshitto  Old  Testament.  Those  con- 
taining the  Psalms  or  the  Pentateuch  are  most  common,  those  containing  the 
Proverbs,  Ecclesiastes,  Solomon's  Song,  Daniel,  and  certain  of  the  Minor 
Prophets,  are  the  most  rare.  /  Many  contain  sundry  books  of  the  Apocrypha;  // 
but  that  called  the  Fifth  Book  of  the  Maccabees  is  merely  the  sixth  book 
of  the  Jewish  Wars  of  Josephus — whether  his  original  Aramaic  versiOiTor 
not,  is  quite  doubtful. 

The  order  of  the  books  in  the  printed  edition  of  our  Syriae  Bibles  varies  a 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  n.  /   v'   505 


(/'" 


little  from  the  Hebrew.     First  comes  the  Pentateuch;  then^  Job.  Joshua. _ 
Judges,   the  two  books  of  Samuel,  the  two  books  of  Kings,  and  the  two 
books  of  Chronicles ;  then  Esther,  Ezra,  Nehemiah ;  Isaiah,  followed  by  the 
twelve  Minor  Prophets;  Jeremiah  and  Lamentations;  Ezekiel,  and  lastly, 
Daniel. 

EDITIONS  OF  THB  PBSHITTO  OLD   TBSTAMBNT. 

(1.)  The  first  edition  was  in  the  Paris  Polyglott,  printed  in  1645.  The 
manuscript  from  which  this  was  printed  is  imperfect,  and  Gabriel  Sionita 
supplied  its  deficiencies  by  translations  of  his  own  from  the  Latin  Vulgate. 
He  also  annexed  vowel  points. 

(2.)  Walton's  Polyglott,  1657,  contained  the  Peshitto  Old  Testament  text, 
derived  from  four  manuscripts,  with  the  help  of  the  Paris  Polyglott. 

(3.)  The  British  and  Foreign  Bible  Society  published  an  edition  of  the 
Syriac  text  alone,  in  1823  (dated  1824).  This  edition  was  prepared  by  Rev. 
Professor  Samuel  Lee,  from  three  manuscripts,  with  great  care.  The  three 
manuscripts  were  (1.)  one  brought  from  India  by  Dr.  Buchanan;  (2.)  one 
belonging  to  Dr.  Adam  Clarke;  and  (3.)  a  Pentateuch  belonging  to  a  col- 
lege library  in  Oxford.  This  edition  was  issued  with  different  titles,  and 
sometimes  bound  up  with  the  New  Testament. 

(4.)  In  1852  the  American  Missionaries  at  Oroomia  published  an_edition  . 
of  the  Peshitto  Old  Testament,  and  th^iy^  modern  Syriac  translation.,  in  par- 
allel columns.  This  volume  is  the  standard  for  scholars  of  Nestorian  vowel 
and  diacritic. pointing.  Its  text  was  obtained  from  ancient  Nestorian  man- 
uscripts (which  cannot  now  be  identified),  some  purchased  and  some  bor- 
rowed ;  with  the  aid  of  Walton's  Polyglott  and  the  edition  of  Lee.  For 
many  purposes  this  is  the  best  edition ;  but  the  book  is  now  rare. 

(5.)  During  the  time  from  1876  to  1885,  Dr.  Antonio  M.  Ceriani  published^vs. 
in  photolithographic  fac-simile  the  oldest  known  manuscript  of  the  Peshitto    \  \ 
Old  Testament ;  being  a  manuscript  in  the  Ambrosian  Library  at  Milan.     A      |  j 
few  portions  are  supplied  from  other  ancient  manuscripts.     This  contains    J  J 
also  the  Apocrypha.,  "'^ 

^"T^^yTne  entire  Peshitto  Old  Testament  was  published  at  Mosul  by  the 
Bominicansin  1887-8;  2  vols.,  and  the  New  Testament  in   1891. 

Many  editions  of  portions  of  the  Peshitto  Old  Testament  have  been 
published,  especially  of  the  Psalms,  wHch  were  first  printed  on  Mt.  Leba^. 
non  in,j585.  The  Pentateuch  was  published  by  feirsch,  Leipzig,  1787. 
The  ** first  labor"  of  the  American  press  at  Oroomia  was  the  Nestorian  Psal- 
ter in  1841. 

The  Apocrypha  were  published  by  Paul  de  Lagarde,  at  Leipzig  and  Lon-^^ 
don  1861.  Various  Apocryphal  books  were  published  by  Ceriani,  in  the  ) 
"Monumenta"  of  the  Ambrosian  Library,  from  1871  onwards.  ^/ 

THE  SYRIAC  HEXAPLAR. 

A  few  manuscripts,  particularly  one  at  Milan  and  one  at  Paris,  contain  a 
Syriac  translation  of  the  corrected  Oreeh  text  of  the  Septuaj^int  version  in 
Origen's  Hbxapla,  with  all  its  marginal  notes  and  various  readings.    Hence 


Digitized  by 


Google 


50«  APPENDIX  II. 

its  name,  the  Syriac  HeMtplar.  From  the  indorsement  on  the  manuscripts 
of  the  Syriac  Hezaplar  we  gather  the  following  facts./f  The  Greek  Hexapla 
of  Origen  was  left  by  him  at  Cesarea  in  Palestine,  andr  fell  into  the  hands  of 
Eu9ebiu$y  the  ecclesiastical  historian,  who  was  bishop  of  Cesarea.  Eusebius, 
aided  by  his  friend  PamphUtiSy  early  in  the  fourth  century,  extracted  a  cor- 
rected Greek  text  of  the  Septuagint,  with  its  marginal  readings  and  glosses. 
Of  this  Eusebian  text,  with  such  a  margin,  indorsed  by  Eusebius  himself, 
a  copy  was  found  at  Alexandria  in  the  beginning  of  the  seventh  century ;  and 
^AthananuSy  at  the  time  that  Jacobite  Patriarch  of  Alexandria,  caused  one 
^  Mar  PaJLJUl,  ftTBdHFabJ  blSli^p,  tO  ti^imamtrfllM  Ureek  Uopv  into  Svriac/, 
jetaininyi  all  its  marginal  readipo^s  and  flosses.  This  task  Mar  Paulus  acconi" 
plished,  at  Alexanaria,'la  the  year  a.  d.  616. 

TRANSLATIONS  OF  80B£B  OF  THB  STBIAC   BKDORSBMBNTS. 

The  third  endorsement  to  the  second  book  of  Kings.  **And  (now)  this 
(book)  of  four  kingdoms,  [this  second  book  of  Bangs,]  is  added  (to  this 
volume),  being  translated  from  the  Greek  into  Syriac.  And  this,  here  pres- 
ent, is  from  the  Heptapla  Codexy  which  has  seten  compartments,  and  which 
belongs  to  the  library  of  CsBsarea,  in  Palestine ;  and  from  which,  likewise, 
the  interpretations  [fragments  of  versions,  or  the  various  readings]  are  an- 
nexed. And  it  was  collated  carefully,  with  the  Codex  of  seven  compart- 
ments, there  being  at  the  end  of  it  this  inscription : — *  Fourth  Book  of  the 
Kingdoms,  according  to  the  Seventy:  and  I,  EiLsebius^  have  carefully  correct- 
ed it,  Pamphilus  having  commenced  the  correction.'' — Immediately  after, 
follows  the  fourth  Indorsement^  thus: — **  This  book  is  translated  from  the 
Greek  tongue  into  Syriac,  from  the  version  of  the  Seventy-Two,  by  the  re- 
ligious monk,  Mab  Paulus,  Bishop  of  the  Faithful,  in  the  great  city  of 
Alexandria,  by  the  injunction  and  solicitude  of  the  holy  and  blessed  Athan- 
Asius,  Patriarch  of  the  Faithful,  in  thejnonastery  of  Mar  Zacy|^^eiia  qallii^l- 
censis.  while  they  resided^at  Alexandria,  in  tke  days  bflne  religious  Mar 
Theodoras^  Prefect  of  the  nouse  of  nis  udonastery ;  in  the  year  dcjcccxxvih., 
in  the  fifth  Indiction,  [that  is,  in  the  year  of  the  Greeks,  928,  or  a.  d.  616.] 
Whoever  reads,  let  him  pray  for  the  religious  Mar  Thomas,  Deacon,  and 
Syncellus  of  the  holy  and  blessed  Patriarch,  Mar  Athakasius,  who  labored 
and  was  at  pains ;  and  for  the  others  who  toiled  and  labored  with  him,  that 
God  may  grant  them  the  salvation  of  their  souls,  on  account  of  their  labor 
and  pains,  through  the  prayers  of  his  [God's]  Mother,  and  of  all  saints." — 
At  the  end  of  most  of  the  other  books  are  Indorsements  of  much  the  same 
general  import :  thus,  at  the  end  of  the  Book  of  Isaiah,  there  is  the  follow- 
ing:— **  End  of  the  Prophecy  of  Isaiah.  This  is  annexed  (to  the  other  books), 
from  the  Codex  of  Eusanius  and  Pamfhilus,  which  also  they  corrected  from 
the  Bibliotheca  of  Origen." — See  also  the  Indorsements  at  the  end  of  the 
twelve  minor  Prophets,  at  the  end  of  the  book  of  Proverbs,  end  of  the  Book 
of  Canticles,  and  of  the  Book  of  Ecclesiastes.  In  all  these  places,  it  is  sta- 
ted that  the  Syriac  translation  was  made  from  a  Codex,  set  forth  by  Eusdrius 
and  Pamphilus,  from  the  Bibliotheca  of  Origen^  containing  various  readings 
and  marginal  notes. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


APPENDIX  n.  507 

PUBLICATION  OF  THB  8TBIA0  HBXAPLAB. 

Both  manuscripts  of  the  Syriac  Hexaplar  are  written  in  the  Estranghelo 
character;  and  apparently  ancient.  That  of  Pafis  contains  only  the  4th 
[2d]  Book  of  Kings:  and  it  was  first  brought  into  notice  in  1770,  by  Paul 
Jacob  Bruns,  That  in  the  Ambrosian  library  at  Milan,  contains  nearly  or 
quite  all  the  Old  Testament.  To  this  valuable  manuscript,  John  Baptist 
Branca^  a  doctor  in  the  Ambrosian  college,  directed  the  attention  of  Dr. 
Kennicott  and  of  J.  P,  Bruns^  while  on  a  visit  to  Milan,  about  the  year  1767. 
A  few  years  after,  J,  J,  Bjornthal^  of  Sweden,  visited  Milan,  examined  the 
manuscript,  sent  some  specimens  of  it  to  England  and  Sweden,  and  also 
published  a  description  of  it.  De  liossi  then  became  interested  in  it,  and  in 
1778,  published  the  first  Psalm  as  a  specimen,  accompanied  by  a  full  account 
of  the  manuscript.  In  the  same  year,  Matthew  Norherg^  of  Sweden,  visited 
Milan,  and  took  a  copy  of  a  large  part  of  it:  and  in  the  year  1787,  he  pub- 
lished at  Lund,  in  4to.,  the  books  of  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  from  his  copy. 
The  next  year  Cajetan  Bugatua,  of  Milan,  published  the  book  of  Daniel, 
Syriac  and  Latin,  4to.  He  also  commenced  the  publication  of  the  book  of 
Psalms,  about  the  same  time;  but  it  was  not  carried  through  the  press  till 
1820.  In  the  mean  time,  Brum  had  procured  a  copy  of  the  Paris  manu- 
script. But  neither  he  nor  Norherg^  met  with  sufficient  encouragement  to 
proceed  with  the  publication  of  their  copies.  They  left  their  manuscript  in 
the  hands  of  Eichhom;  who  at  length  transferred  them  to  Henry  Middle 
dorpf,  a  professor  in  the  university  of  Breslau,  in  Silesia;  and  he  published 
so  much  of  these  transcripts  as  had  not  before  been  published, — viz.  the 
4th  [2d]  book  of  Kings,  Isaiah,  the  twelve  minor  Prophets,  Proverbs,  Job, 
Canticles.  Lamentations,  and  Ecclesiastes— in  one  large  vol.  4to.,  Berlin, 
1835;  with  a  learned  Preface,  containing  the  facts  above  stated.  **The 
books  of  Judges  and  Ruth  were  published  at  Copenhagen  by  Thomas  Skat 
Rardam,  1859—1861.  The  entire  Milan  manuscript  was  published  in  photo- 
type fac-simile  by  A,  M.  Ceriani^  1861—1874.  In  1880  PauldeLagarde^iib 
lished  at  Goettingen  some  fragments  of  the  Syriac  Hexaplar.** 

This  Syriac  version  adheres  very  closely  to  the  Greek;  and  therefore  will 
aid  us,  so  far  as  it  extends,  in  ascertaining  what  text  of  the  Septuagint  was 
approved  by  Origen^  and  by  Eusebius  and  Pamphilus.  It  may  also  help  us 
to  recover  some  of  the  deviations  from  the  Septuagint,  in  the  several  Greek 
versions  collated  by  Origen,  Of  course.  Jor  criticism  of  the  Septuagint^ 
(^reeh  text,  it  is  of  great  value.  But  for  the  interpretation  of  the  Scriptures, 
it  calinot  be  of  much  use,  on  account  of  its  servility,  and  its  adherence  to 
the  Septuagint.  As  a  translation,  it  is  very  like  the  Harclensian  New  Testa- 
ment: which  Thomas  Harclensis  was  revising  at  Alexandria  at  the  very  time 
when  Mar  Paulus  was  producing  this  version.  As  the  Peshitto  New  Testa, 
ment  is  far  more  valuable,  for  exegetical  purposes,  than  the  Harclensian  ver. 
sion ;  so  the  Peshitto  Old  Testament,  which  is  a  faithful  translation  from  the 
Hebrew,  must  be  far  more  valuable  to  an  interpreter,  than  the  Syriac  Hexa- 
plar^ which  is  a  servile  translation  from  the  Septuagint  Greek. 

THB  END. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


/ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


''"^^^^ 


^JiWH- 


i§M^ 


*-•/ 


